At it's core, the question of whom to trust is of course crucial, as there are
clearly at least straw-man answers that have undesirable effects. But the
trust topology affects more than safety, it affects the scenarios in which a
consensus protocol is useful. E.g., if I issue some scrip and trade it on the
Stellar network, I don't necessarily want to depend on mining rigs in other
parts of the world for my ledger safety. I want to tell people "trust whomever
you want, but be sure to include me as well, because I won't let you redeem
the scrip if you don't have it on my ledger."

Part of the goal of SCP is to leave such policy questions up to the market and
see what kind of architecture emerges. Our hope is that this flexibility
combined with the lower barrier to entry will lead to greater financial
inclusion as people build on our platform. But if we add too many policy
restrictions, we risk heading off unanticipated innovations. (Heck, someone
might literally replicate the Bitcoin policy and configure their quorum slices
to trust 67% of whoever mined a Bitcoin block in the past week. That wouldn't
really make sense, but it's possible.)

That said, what you're getting at is that with flexibility comes risk. We
can't a priori rule out the possibility that organizations will choose bad
quorum slices that violate safety. But we need to ask under what circumstances
people care about safety and why. People obviously won't care about forks if
one of the branches is purely a Sybil attack. But they likely will care if
"real organizations" diverge, for some notion of that term. The reason, again,
is that at some point the "real organizations" will affect one another in the
network, however indirectly--maybe after a chain of five payments. That kind
of indirect link is precisely what FBA quorums capture in the transitive
closure of slices. So if everyone depends on the financial institutions they
expect to do business with, and the whole economy is in fact interconnected,
then Stellar will be safe.

I obviously believe such interdependence exists, and fully expect Stellar to
be safe, but I can't predict exactly what the network will look like. Nor do I
want to, as this could limit innovation. Only time will tell how this plays
out.

