Here's my motivation for /P2SH/ or something like it:  
  
I want to stop playing whack-a-mole with wallet stealing viruses and trojans,
and I think requiring more than one private key to sign away your bitcoins is
the critical feature needed to do that. Keep one set of keys on your computer,
another set of keys on your cell phone, teach each to talk to the other before
sending out bitcoins and you're safe (as long as a virus or trojan doesn't
infect BOTH your cell phone and your computer at the same time).  
  
The bitcoin protocol already supports that, but the bitcoin _network_ , the
bitcoin _software_ , and the bitcoin _addresses_ that we're all using now
don't support multisignature transactions.  
  
OP_EVAL and /P2SH/ and Luke's OP_CODEHASHCHECK are all slightly different ways
of implementing multisignature transactions that are as short as the bitcoin
addresses we're using today.  
  
  
RE: the timeframe:  
  
I'm pushing this hard because I'm tired of hearing that users lost their
bitcoins to trojans and viruses, and getting there is a multi-step process
that will take a lot longer than I'd like:  
  
1\. First a majority of miners have to validate, accept and mine the new
transaction types. (that's the Feb 15 date)  
2\. Second we have to convince enough people to upgrade so that they are
relayed around the network and not dropped  
3\. Finally, we can release software with wallets that use the new feature.  
  
I'm losing patience because this process started in October, over three months
ago, and certain people seem determined to do whatever they can to derail it--
if I was more conspiracy-theory-minded I would think somebody was purposely
trying to keep bitcoin less secure than it can be. roconnor brought up
legitimate complaints with OP_EVAL that were discussed and addressed with
/P2SH/, but I can't respond to every half-baked scheme that is supposedly
"better" or I will spend all of my time explaining why something like
CODEHASHCHECK is a bad idea and have no time left over to making Bitcoin
better.  

