I just sent this email to several of the top mining pools; I'm also putting it
here to get wider feedback from "the mining community":  

* * *

I'm writing to the top mining pools to see if you will support Bitcoin
Improvement Proposals 11, 12, and 13:  
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/BIP_0011  
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/BIP_0012  
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/BIP_0013  
  
I think they are critical to making Bitcoin more secure for people who have
never heard of GPG or AES. They don't solve the wallet security problem, but
they put in place low-level mechanisms that will allow higher-level services
that DO solve the "computer virus stole my bitcoins" problem. Once multi-
signature transactions are supported by the network, Bitcoin wallets can be
coded to contact "Wallet Protection Services" to get a second
signature/authorization before coins can be spent (details of exactly how the
Wallet Protection Service and the client communicate will be in future BIPs).
They will also make it possible to create escrow services that cannot spend
the bitcoins in escrow among other interesting use cases.  
  
This same feature might be used to keep your pool's bitcoin balances more
secure, also-- you could run your own Wallet Protection Code on a separate
machine that (perhaps) required manual intervention before providing a second
signature on pool payouts if some unusual payout activity was occurring
because somebody managed to break your security and get access to the pool's
wallet.  
  
I'm proposing extreme caution rolling out support for multi-signature
transactions, and, especially, supporting the OP_EVAL feature that allows more
secure bitcoin addresses-- and that is why I'm asking you whether or not
you're willing to patch your mining pool software sometime in the next two
months to support the new 'standard'  
transaction types.  
  
I've already written an implementation for Bitcoin 0.5 that will soon become a
PULL request.  
  
The new features are backwards-compatible with existing miners and clients,
but we do have to be careful when rolling out OP_EVAL because an attacker
could create non-standard transactions and try to split the block-chain.  
  
Here is the timeline I've proposed in BIP 0012 :  
  
Now until Jan 15, 2012 : miners update their software, start including
CHECKMULTISIG and OP_EVAL transactions in blocks they mine, and indicate
support by including the string "OP_EVAL" in the blocks they produce.  
  
Jan 15, 2012: we assess support for the new feature by looking at the
percentage of blocks that contain "OP_EVAL". If a majority of miners are not
supporting it, then deployment will be delayed or cancelled (a setting in
bitcoin.conf controls the switchover date, with the default being Feb 1,
2012).  
  
Feb 1, 2012: assuming there was majority support on Jan 15, OP_EVAL is fully
supported/validated.  
  
\--------------  
Questions I have for you:  
  
Is there anything I can do to make it easier for you to support these new
features? For example, would patches against an earlier version of bitcoind be
useful? (if so, what version?)  
  
Is the timeline reasonable?  
  
Questions you might have:  
  
What happens if you don't support these new transaction types but a majority
of other miners do?  
  
If you do not put non-standard transactions in your blocks, then nothing will
happen.  
  
If you DO put non-standard transactions in your blocks, then you would be
vulnerable to an "invalidate blocks under the new rules" attack, where
somebody sends you a transaction that is valid under the old interpretation of
the OP_EVAL opcode (which is a no-op) but not valid under the new rules. Your
miner would put that transaction in blocks that you mine, and all of your
blocks would be rejected by the majority of miners.  
  
What happens if you DO support these new transaction types but a majority of
other miners do not?  
  
All transactions that you put into blocks will be valid under both the old
rules and the new rules, so there is no danger that blocks you create will be
rejected by the network. There IS a danger that the rest of the network will
accept a block under the old rules that you consider invalid under the new
rules; that is why I am proposing that we evaluate acceptance of the new rules
on January 15.  
  
Can you support one of the BIPs but not all of them?  
  
Yes-- supporting CHECKMULTISIG as a standard transaction type (BIP 11) can
safely be deployed right now, there is no danger of a block-chain-split, etc.  
  
BIPs 12 and 13 will let users (or mining pools) use short bitcoin payment
addresses to have bitcoins go directly into secure, multi-authentication-
required-to-spend wallets.  

