

I wrote this three years ago, and I'd still like to see something like it
implemented. Now we've got Bitcoin, implementing it might be much easier; I'd
love to see a bitcoin bbs/forum that uses these ideas to reward thoughtful,
high-quality discussion (replace "email list" everywhere below with
"discussion forum" and I think it all still works):  
  

* * *

I was listening to "The Ethics of Liberty" yesterday, and it got me thinking
about email lists.  
  
Most email discussion lists seem to suffer from a Tragedy of the Commons--
there's not a whole lot of motivation for people posting their opinions to
think twice about spouting off, or going on and on and on, or otherwise
polluting the list with stuff that the subscribers to the list might consider
junk.  
  
There are a couple of solutions to these kinds of problems. You can try to set
up some kind of policing system, with trusted moderators given the power to
bless posts, ban people, etc. You need really thick-skinned, generous-hearted,
even-tempered moderators for that to work.  
  
A solution that works in the real world that hasn't been tried for the email
mailing list problem (as far as I know) is some kind of economic system, where
the common resource is given a value and anybody wanting to use the resource
must pay rent (which is then used to maintain the resource).  
  
So, here's a thumbnail sketch of how this might work for an email mailing
list:  
  
Create an artificial currency. If you have enough of this currency, you're
allowed to post messages to the list. Longer posts cost more than shorter
posts.  
  
Everybody starts with some amount of this currency. Everybody is allowed to
use it themselves, give it away, or sell it (for real money!) to people who
want to use it to post messages.  
  
Every message posted includes ways of:  
\- Tagging the message as "Worthwhile" --> transfers currency from your
account to the poster's account.  
\- Tagging the message as "Waste of my Time" --> transfers currency from
poster's account to the common pool of currency.  
  
The amount of currency in the system is tied to the desired message traffic.
We all have a limited attention span; basically, the trick will be to create
an artificial economy so that the people who contribute positively are
encouraged to contribute more, and people who "pollute" are punished.  
  
Currency goes into the system every day (again, based on desired message
traffic per day). Some is assigned to new people signing up for the list, and
the rest evenly distributed to everybody already on the list.  
  
"Lurkers" on the list could either hoard their currency, offer to sell it, or
give it away to people from whom they want to hear more.

