  
A friend sent me a link to a GeekWire article about Seattle Bitcoin startup
CoinLab raising half a million dollars and asked "is that a good or bad
thing?"  
  
It's a good thing!  
  
The long-term vision for the Bitcoin economy is a closed loop-- people earn
and spend bitcoins, instead of exchanging bitcoins for some other currency.  
  
Since most people get most of the earnings in the form of a salary, and since
I think it will take a very long time (if ever!) before a typical company
considers paying employees in Bitcoin, the 'earning' side of the equation
worries me most.  
  
That's why I created the Bitcoin Faucet, and that's why I like to see projects
like ForBitcoin or FeedZeBirds that give people all of the world ways to earn
a little coin. They give anybody with an internet connection and some extra
time, anywhere in the world, a way to put their time to productive use.
That's a very good thing.  
  
CoinLab's idea is to let game companies "earn profit from idle users with a
custom-branded coin client." The users run a little program and are awarded
with in-game items or power-ups. The game companies get dollars.  And CoinLab
makes it all work by doing a bunch of behind-the-scenes infrastructure,
exchanging the bitcoins that the users create for dollars.  
  
I think CoinLab is being smart by not asking the game companies or users to
deal with bitcoins, but instead having them deal with what they're already
comfortable with (dollars and in-game commodities).  
  
But eliminating the exchange and paying the gamers and/or the game developers
directly in bitcoin would be more efficient, and is an obvious, easy-to-
implement feature. Bit-Pay is doing something similar for merchants,
depositing dollars or bitcoins or both in their accounts when they receive
bitcoin payments.  
  
I think the biggest market for a service like CoinLab will be younger gamers.
If you're 15 years old and don't pay rent or electricity then leaving your
computer running overnight to earn some in-game currency will be pretty darn
appealing. If a whole generation of video-game-playing kids grows up with
Bitcoin then the future for Bitcoin will be very bright.  
  
Theoretically it even makes sense if you **are** paying for the electricity,
because CoinLab is essentially outsourcing all of the billing and payment and
collection infrastructure to the local electric company. And utility companies
are pretty darn good at getting their customers to pay their bills; that
translates into a more efficient payment system and lower costs for users.  
  
But... but... what about the environment? What about all those gamers using
all that extra electricity to create bitcoins?   **THINK ABOUT THE POLAR
BEARS!**  
  
Big-picture economics lesson: more efficient == better.  Better for people,
better for the environment.  
  
Think about the unseen-- if people are (indirectly) using electricity to pay
for in-game items instead of using their credit-cards or buying 'game cards'
in stores, where does the cost-savings coming from?  

  
That's easy to think about for physical game cards-- there will be fewer
produced, which means less plastic manufactured, fewer trucks shipping them
from some factory to stores, and fewer car trips to the mall so teenagers can
spend a little cash to get their Farmville fix.  
  
It's harder to think about for credit cards, because the costs are really
well-hidden. A lot of effort is put into collecting bad debts. I'm sure credit
card companies and debt collection agencies spend a lot of money on
electricity for their call centers, but most of the cost savings will be fewer
people trying to get deadbeats to pay their bills.  
  
That would be a good thing, too! Collecting debts doesn't make the world a
better place, and the out-of-work debt collectors will find something more
productive to do. Maybe they'll go work for the game company who has a little
extra cash and can afford to pay for another customer support person. Maybe
they'll go work in a Sierra Club call center, convincing gamers who have a
little extra cash (because they paid $10 on their electricity bill for some
game stuff instead of paying $10.05 to a credit card company) to contribute to
programs that help polar bears...  
  

