

Quote from: sgornick on February 26, 2011, 09:55:51 PM

However if the transaction never happens (e.g., my trading partner backs out
and doesn't end up sigining in to ClearCoin) then is there a way for me to get
the escrow fee that I prepaid back?  

  
Great suggestion, I will modify the code to refund the escrow fee (if any) and
donate the rest.  
  

Quote

Like a mediator's address? This is the most critical feature, IMO. Though it
will be awkward to try to obtain in advance a bitcoin address for the mediator
for each transaction. Hmm ...  

  
I have some preliminary plans for mediated escrows that will require all three
parties to have ClearCoin accounts. I'm still thinking about how to make it as
simple to use as possible.  
  

Quote

Quote

3\. If the coins are refunded to charity, show Alice and Bob the transaction
ID so it is easier for them to make sure ClearCoin isn't taking the coins.  

If they are a 501 (c) 3 (U.S. charitable organization) , I might like that so
that, at a minimum, I have a "receipt" to claim that refund as a charitable
contribution.  

Great idea, I'll put it on the "nice to have" list.  
  

Quote

I want greater control over the escrow ending date. Contracts generally have
specific date for things to happen and ClearCoin should match that practice by
allowing me to specify the exact date (and time?) that the escrow ends.  

Easy to do. How critical is time? Plus or minus 1 hour would be easy (there's
a 'cron job' that runs once per hour to process refunds), but I don't want to
make the Create an Escrow page more complicated than it really needs to be.  
  

Quote

Will the threshold continue to be 100 BTC? When ClearCoin started, that 100
BTC represented about a $25 max amount. Today that is about a $93 amount. I'ld
like to know if there is a general USD dollar amount target for the "no fee /
fee" threshold, or can I cound on up to 100 BTC being free for quite some time
yet?  

I'll probably target transactions under $50 remaining free, and I'm thinking
of capping fees at $4... but it is likely I'll experiment with different
pricing models as I fill out features. Paying mediators (before and/or when
mediation is required) adds lots more wrinkles...  

Quote

Jurisdiction: Might there be plans for a ClearCoin service residing in a
different jurisdiction?  

Nope. Maybe I'll franchise later if Bitcoin and ClearCoin really take off.  

Quote

Anonymity: Currently if my Google account gets hacked, then my ClearCoin
escrows are vulnerable should the attacker know that I use ClearCoin. Are
there any plans to allow registration using an authentation method other than
a Google account?  

No-- what authentication method would you like to see? I don't like the idea
of supporting arbitrary OpenID authentication, because it is so easy to create
throwaway OpenID identities (creating throwaway Google identities is at least
a LITTLE bit harder...).  

