

Quote from: Hal on March 27, 2011, 08:42:35 PM

One way to analyze these is via a threat model. What can the attacker do, that
we will try to defend against? And what will we not defend against?  
  
We can distinguish three levels of attacker:  
  
1\. Can read user files  
  
2\. Can read/write user files but only read system files  
  
3\. Can read/write everything, root privileges  

  
I think that's the right way to think about it. And I think Jeff actually
implementing a straw-man proposal is exactly the right thing to do.  
  
So: I say we don't try to defend against (3), at least not right now. If you
have root then you can install a keylogger, read memory, intercept any system
call, etc etc etc. (I would like to see somebody implement a bitcoin client
that required payment verification using a cell phone app or telephone call or
PIN-sent-to-email and did all the magic key management to make that work
securely, but I think that's beyond the scope of what we can reasonably do
right now).  
  
Defending against (1) and (2) would help with:  
  
a) you forget to logout so attacker sits down at your computer, starts bitcoin
and empties your wallet.  
b) attacker gets a hold of a filesystem backup that is not encrypted.  
c) sysadmin sets file permissions incorrectly so attacker on multi-user system
can read your wallet.dat  
d) attacker guesses or finds out your ssh password, logs in remotely and
steals your wallet.dat.  
  
It won't help with:  
\- sysadmin with root privileges is evil  
\- system compromised by rootkit/trojan/keylogger  
  
  
RE: encrypt everything: I say maybe later. Just encrypt everything isn't
trivial: users would have to wait a minute or two or ten for Berkeley DB to
rewrite all of blkindex.dat (bottleneck will be disk I/O, not the encryption),
and we have to deal with "my disk filled up when I changed my password, things
are half-encrypted and half-not, what do I do now?" And I don't see a lot of
value in encrypting all of wallet.dat; forget to shutdown bitcoin and an
attacker that wants to know your public addresses can just open up the address
book and take a screenshot.

