

Quote from: theymos on October 03, 2012, 03:32:27 PM

Requiring a 50 BTC deposit (or whatever) would be another way to prevent Sybil
attacks. Perhaps this could be an alternative to giving out your identity.  
  
Another possibility would be to have one of several third-parties verify your
identity and give you an anonymous "voting token" using blind signing.  

  
50 BTC (or whatever) deposit, tied up for a minimum of a year (don't want
somebody putting down 1,000 BTC deposits the day before a vote, voting 20
times, then canceling their 20 sockpuppet memberships and getting their
deposit back immediately) is an interesting idea.  
  
Call me paranoid, but I don't see many third parties who I would trust to not
get hacked and to properly identify anonymous people. I don't see that third
parties would have a strong incentive to do a good job at that. And delegating
that piece of really core functionality feels like the wrong way to go to me.  
  
For the record: I think it would be great to come up with an easier way for
people to remain anonymous but still be Foundation members. I say "easier"
because I'd guess with enough effort you could use a (physical) mail
forwarding service and an anonymous email service to sign up with a fake
identity. I suppose the mail forwarding service is like an identity-checking
service.  
  
RE: one vote per bitcoin: there seems to be some notion that Foundation member
will be voting on things like "should a change to the core protocol be rolled
out to support XYZ."  
  
Umm, no. Foundation members will be voting for (and lobbying) board members
who will decide things like "should the bylaws be changed to allow anonymous
memberships" or "how much Foundation budget should be dedicated to X and how
much to Y." The number of bitcoins you own has nothing to do with those kinds
of organizational decisions.  
  
Technical changes will happen as they have for the last couple of years-- get
rough consensus in the developer community then convince miners and merchants
and users to upgrade.  
  

