I thought I'd explain a little more why I think most conservatives might have
a negative reaction to bitcoin, why libertarians love it, and why I think
liberals might be convinced to love it.  
  
I'm starting from Jonathan Haidt's Moral Foundation Theory, which says that we
all have five basic universal moral foundations:  

  * Harm/care
  * Fairness/reciprocity
  * Ingroup/loyalty
  * Authority/respect
  * Purity/sanctity

Different cultures and people of different political or religious viewpoints
feel more strongly about some of these than others. Conservatives score pretty
highly on all five; liberals score very high on the first two. Libertarians...
are complicated. More like conservatives when it comes to money, more like
liberals when it comes to social issues.  
  
So: how do I think people will react to bitcoin for each of the five moral
foundations?  
  
Harm/care: if Bitcoin gets a reputation for 'that online currency that the
criminals and drug dealers use' then that's bad.  
  
Fairness/reciprocity: if Bitcoin is seen as 'that online currency that made a
bunch of early adopter geeks obscenely wealthy' then that's bad.  
  
Ingroup/loyalty: I think conservatives might feel like bitcoin is an affront
to Their National Currency (whatever currency that happens to be).  
  
Authority/respect: Conservatives probably won't like a rag-tag band of open
source rebels trying to overthrow The Authorities. I'm not happy about the
tone of the recent Forbes article, for example.  
  
Purity/sanctity: Assuming we can get past the Harm/care problems, I actually
think bitcoin could be positioned as the purest form of online money.  
  
Moral Foundations Theory strikes me as probably right (and it's backed by
pretty solid research, it is not just philosophical musings). I've been
thinking about how to "frame" bitcoin to appeal to people on a moral/emotional
level. Random thoughts:  
  
Fairness/reciprocity: if you're an early adopter geek, start circulating your
coins-- send them to MyBitcoin or MtGox and then back to yourself if you want
to keep them, but make it hard to tell if there ARE any early adopter geeks
holding lots of coins. And if you're talking about bitcoin, compare it to the
fairness of the current system, where bankers are allowed to create (and
profit from) creation of money.  
  
What do y'all think?  

