  
Umm, they seemed to be doing OK overall when I was there a couple of years
ago, despite the horrible drought, terrible floods, and Hurricane Yasi.  
  
  
I'm all for doing things to keep people from dying and suffering. Rereading
the IPCC report, the big killers/dangers will be an increase in malaria and
other diseases in poor countries.  
  
It seems to me policies that make the poor countries richer (free trade, open
immigration, stable political institutions and rule of law) is the best way to
tackle those problems.  
  
Or to put it another way: The US will probably spend years arguing over
whether or not a carbon tax (or cap and trade or whatever) is a good idea (I'm
watching to see what happens with Australia's carbon tax with great interest,
by the way). Maybe we'll eventually pass one and reduce our carbon emissions.  
  
I predict that will just move carbon-intensive industries somewhere else in
the world, and carbon emissions will continue to rise.  
  
I think it would be better to spend the time arguing over what we could do to
help make poor countries rich. Or argue for open borders so poor people in
places that are getting flooded (don't buy real estate in Bangladesh...) have
a place to go.  
  
Or, if you REALLY think rising CO2 levels will be a catastrophe, then rich
countries or individuals should create solar-powered CO2 scrubbers and spend
money installing gazillions of them in the desert. Because betting on the
whole world coming together and agreeing to do something is about a million
times _less_ likely than getting everybody on this forum to agree on... well,
pretty much anything.  
  
  
Don't buy real estate in Florida. New York will be mostly OK ("The average
elevation of Manhattan is reported to be 29 meters (97 feet"); I can't find a
mean elevation for LA, but city hall is 300 feet above sea level so unless you
buy beachfront property you'll be OK.  
  
With global warming, we're talking changes that happen over a hundred or three
(or more) years. I may be wrong (I often am), but I'd be the big worry 100
years from now will not be global warming, but something else. Maybe running
out of Unobtanium for our flying cars....  

