There was a discussion on the Amherst Town Meeting mailing list a while ago
about paper versus plastic versus cloth grocery bags, which poked my
"skeptical" and "libertarian" buttons.  
  
"Skeptical" because I think much of the debate over paper versus plastic is
driven by the "natural must be better" fallacy.  Plastic comes from nasty,
icky oil, and so must be worse for the environment than paper, which comes
from beautiful, majestic trees.  Cutting down beautiful, majestic trees to
make paper is evil, too, of course, so we should all re-use organic hemp
shopping bags.  
  
"Libertarian" because the idea of Town Meeting deciding what the best way of
bringing my groceries home just rubs me the wrong way; we'll all have
different opinions on how much we value saving the environment, convenience,
hygiene, cost, and signaling our environmental bona-fides by schlepping around
filthy, tattered, disease-ridden reusable bags.  (I'm skeptical of the idea
that reusable bags are dangerous due to germs, but I respect that some people
are genuinely worried about that)  
  
So I was please to run across this thorough, data-driven study of plastic
versus paper versus cloth bags on the environment:  
  http://www.biodeg.org/files/uploaded/Carrier_Bags_Report_EA.pdf  
  
  
  
As far as I can tell, it's not a fluff piece sponsored by the Plastic Bag
Council of Wales-- the study was sponsored by the Environment Agency, "a
British non-departmental public body of the Department for Environment, Food
and Rural Affairs and an Assembly Government Sponsored Body of the Welsh
Government that serves England and Wales."  
  
Looks like if you use your cotton bags more than 130 times, and you just throw
out your plastic shopping bags, then cloth is better than plastic. I use ours
probably twice a week, and they seem to last 3 or 4 years (about 300 or 400
re-uses), so definitely in the better-for-the-environment category.  
  
So policy-wise, a disposable-bag-tax to encourage use of re-usable bags would
be the smart thing to do.  
  
Unless that means more people drive a little farther to Stop and Shop in
Hadley instead of Big Y in Amherst, of course. I'd bet gasoline usage getting
to the store is hundreds of times more damaging to the environment than what
kind of bag you use. Charging 25cents for parking at the grocery store would
probably be even better public policy.  
  
PS: I generally don't like collecting things, but make an exception for
reusable bags-- we've been collecting them from trips overseas. The little
cloth bag we got from our stay in Yungaburra is my favorite, although the big
re-usable plastic bag from Paris is probably the most functional. Travelling
by airplane is absolutely terrible for the environment, though...

