On monday night Town Meeting decided to amend the budget to double the
recreation subsidy given to low income families, from about $100,000 per year
to $200,000 per year. Apparently, funds were running out half-way through the
year. There are roughly 1,000 low-income kids in Amherst, so if they all
participate in LSSE programs we'll be giving each $200 worth of swimming or
sports or after-school-programs.  
  
I don't know how to think about that. Is $200-per-kid-per-year enough? Too
much? Just right? I'm sure there are families that can't afford even a heavily
subsidized rec fee. And there are probably families too proud to accept a
subsidy; maybe LSSE programs for kids should be free to everybody, so nobody
need feel embarrassed asking for the subsidy.  
  
And how should Town Meeting members weigh spending $200,000 per year on
increasing recreational opportunities versus fixing potholes or hiring more
police?  
  
If we gave lower-income families a choice between getting either a $200
subsidy for LSSE programs or getting $200 in cash, I think most would take the
cash. There is probably some Massachusetts law preventing Towns from giving
people cash grants, but it seems to me it would be better to empower parents
to make decisions like "should I spend money on a math tutor or swim lessons
or brake pads for the car."  
  
A lot of our social safety net seems like micromanagement to me. I wonder if
that is mostly due to progressives who think of the State as a "nurturing
mother" with a duty to take care of each of her children's needs ("gotta be
sure to provide environmentally friendly housing and nutritious food and
liberal education and healthy recreation and...").  
  
Or if it is due to conservatives who think of the State as a "strict father"
with a duty to prevent or punish his children's bad decisions ("can't just
give cash, they might spend it on Bad Things").  
  
Probably both. So I expect I'll spend a lot more time sitting in Town Meeting
listening to heartfelt appeals to increase recreation opportunities for
children by increase subsidies for LSSE or increase safety for children by
hiring more police or firefighters or increase education for children by
hiring more teachers or increase the health of children by giving benefits to
part-time Town employees.  
  
In the grand scheme of things, I suppose that's not so bad-- it would be worse
if Amherst was spending money to bomb someplace far away "to benefit future
generations of children."  
  

