

Quote from: ribuck on January 26, 2012, 09:45:00 PM

1\. It's prudent to avoid executing data from the stack. Why? Because you have
a scripts that manipulate data on the stack. Obviously the system is designed
so that scripts can't manipulate the data that is going to be executed. But if
there is a bug, you have all the pieces in place for an exploit. The script
doesn't have opcodes to manipulate off-stack data, so Luke's implementation
seems safer.  

  
Did you read BIP 16?  
  

Quote

Validation fails if there are any operations other than "push data" operations
in the scriptSig.

  
So there is no manipulation allowed AT ALL.  
  

Quote

2\. Supporters of BIP 16 claim that it allows 5-10 times more headroom before
block size limits are reached. Supporters of BIP 17 claim that it puts fewer
bytes into the block. Can someone please make a clear statement about what
these proposals actually mean for scalability?  

  
A maximum of 1,000 "naked" OP_CHECKMULTISIG operations are allowed in the
scriptSigs and scriptPubKeys of transactions in any given block.  
  
We had a block earlier this month with 1,8000 scriptSigs, so I think we are
uncomfortably close to that limit.  
  
BIP 16 "hides" the CHECKMULTISIGS in the serialized script, so more of them
are allowed.  
  

Quote

3\. It's clear that both BIP 16 and BIP 17 transactions can be spent by others
if those transactions are broadcast before 50% of the mining power (plus a
safety margin) supports them. It's also clear that the BIP 17 transactions are
easier to spend in this situation. However I think this is a non-issue because
(a) mining power will quickly rise above 50% once consensus is reached, and
(b) who is going to broadcast these newfangled transactions before the mining
power is there to support them?

  
At the very least BIP 17 is harder to test-- Luke had to test on the main
network because I was naughty and wrote and ran a BIP-17-transaction-stealing
bot (sorry, I couldn't resist).  
  

Quote

3\. I have a vague feeling of undue haste. Gavin has already said that his
motivation is the security of people's transactions, and I don't doubt it. But
is that the whole motivation? Gavin needs to say whether it's commercially
relevant to his current work project whether BIP 16 or BIP 17 is chosen (or
how quickly the new functionality is firmed up). It's no big deal if Gavin has
a commercial interest. In that case, he should just step aside from
administering the oversight of this particular decision.  

  
I have zero commercial interest; I am not being paid by anybody for anything
right now.  

