  
Huh what?  
  
I am not proposing infinitely sized blocks, so I obviously acknowledge the
concept of a too-high limit as being plausible.  
  
If you want to continue the conversation, please be very explicit about what
problem you think needs solving, and how whatever solution you're proposing
solves that problem.  
  
We might agree or disagree on both of those points, but we won't have a
productive conversation if you can't say what problem you are trying to solve.  
  
To summarize my position: I see one big problem that need solving:  
  
Supporting lots (millions, eventually billions) of people transacting in
Bitcoin.  
Ideally at as low a cost as possible, as secure as possible, and in the most
decentralized and censorship-resistant way possible.  
  
It is hard to get consensus on HOW to solve that problem, because no solution
is obviously lowest cost, most secure, and most decentralized all at the same
time, and different people assign different weights to the importance of those
three things.  
  
My bias is to "get big fast" -- I think the only way Bitcoin thrives is for
lots of people to use it and to be happy using it. If it is a tiny little
niche thing then it is much easier for politicians or banks to smother it,
paint it as "criminal money", etc. They probably can't kill it, but they sure
could make life miserable enough to slow down adoption by a decade or three.  
  
"Get big fast" has been the strategy for a few years now, ever since the
project became too famous to fly under the radar of regulators or the
mainstream press.  
  
The simplest path to "get big fast" is allowing the chain to grow. All the
other solutions take longer or compromise decentralization (e.g. off-chain
transactions require one or more semi-trusted entities to validate those off-
chain transactions). I'm listening very carefully to anybody who argues that a
bigger chain will compromise security, and those concerns are why I am NOT
proposing an infinite maximum block size.  
  
There **is** rough consensus that the max block size must increase. I don't
think there is consensus yet on exactly HOW or WHEN.  

