  
---  
Sunset in Wyoming  
I hate driving.  
  
Not because I'm bad at it; like the vast majority of Americans, my driving
skills are far above average. I just find it tedious and boring.  
  
This summer we went on a bike trip in Colorado, and then did a big, 2,500-mile
car trip through Utah, Idaho, Washington and Wyoming.  
  
Some of that driving was interesting, with stunning scenery zooming by. But
most of it was tedious and boring. We did it partly because I think long,
boring car trips are a rite of passage for kids; I certainly remember being
eleven years old, stuck in the back seat of the cars for hours on end, driving
into the night and then staying in a boring hotel room.  
  
My grandkids might never have the experience of being bored in the backseat of
a car and having to deal with a tired and grumpy parent that has driven ten
hours since breakfast. It looks like self-driving cars will happen in the next
ten or twenty years.  
  
I want to rent a self-driving RV for my next big road trip. I'd start my trip
after dinnertime, tell it where I want to eat breakfast, and then sleep
through all the boring, tedious driving.  
  
I think self-driving cars will have big, unintended consequences. Maybe multi-
hour commutes will be no big deal, and suburbs even farther away from city
centers will be common.  
  
Maybe weekend homes 8 or 10 hours away will become a lot more popular; sleep
on the way there Friday night, sleep on the way home Sunday night.  
  
They should be really bad news for airlines and high-speed rail, especially if
special, "robot driver only" very-high-speed highways are built. If they make
people fly less, they should be good for the environment-- although I expect
the fuel saved from less flying will be balanced out by people travelling more
overall.  
  
Maybe we'll see lots of retired people becoming nomads, spending their money
on gasoline instead of hotel rooms, spending nights in their Robobagos on the
road, driving at 42 miles an hour in huge groups to get better gas mileage...  

* * *

  
PS: the driving-skills-above-average sentence is just there to catch people
who post snarky comments before reading to the end of the post (yes, I know
that sentence cannot be true).  
  

