

Thought it might be interesting for y'all to see the 'raw interview':  
  

Quote

1) What do you see as the primary strengths or advantages of Bitcoin; why is
it needed? Put another way, for an individual or a business just coming across
it, why would they chose to use it?  

Bitcoin is an open, international payment network. More and more businesses
are choosing to accept bitcoins because it is an easy way to allow anybody,
anywhere in the world, to pay for products or services-- even people from
countries where credit cards and bank accounts might not be common.  
  
It is also very low-cost, because it was designed for the Internet.  
  
Individuals use it for a few different reasons.  
  
The earliest adopters started using bitcoins either because they like the idea
(for political or personal reasons) of using a currency that isn't controlled
by a government or corporation or just because it was "new and cool."  
  
Some people use it because they have no other choice; for example, more and
more legal, online gaming sites use bitcoins to make it possible for players
in countries that try to restrict onling gaming (like the US) to play.  
  
We're just starting to see individuals using bitcoin because it saves them
money; merchants are starting to pass on some of the savings (much lower
transaction fees, no "chargebacks") to customers who pay using bitcoin.  
  
  

Quote

2) Bitcoin isn't the first or the only digital currency, but it has rapidly
become the most prominent. What accounts for that?  

People trust that it isn't going to disappear, because there is no central
organization that can either go bankrupt or be forced to shut down by a
government. Currencies are all about trust, and more people are beginning to
trust this decentralized currency that is supported by everybody who uses it.  
  
  

Quote

3) A number of people I have spoken with dismiss it as little more than a
speculative fad, akin to the Dutch tulip mania or a dot com stock, and cite
the recent run-up and collapse as evidence. What is your reaction to that
argument?  

I still tell people "only invest time or money into Bitcoin that you can
afford to lose." I expect more drama and chaos and price fluctuations in the
short-term. The current price bubble was driven by lots of attention in the
press here in the US and in Europe, and all of the attention was self-
reinforcing: stories about Bitcoin's dramatic price rise got people
interested, which drove the price higher, which triggered even more stories.  
  
I expect that will happen again in the next few years, perhaps in a different
area of the world (maybe there will be a China-driven bitcoin bubble in a few
years that will pop when the Chinese government decides to try to restrict
bitcoin transaction across their Great Firewall).  
  
But in the long-term, I expect that to settle down, and the value of a bitcoin
to become much more stable.  
  

Quote

4) Would Bitcoin need to have a more stable valuation for it to become a more
widely accepted alternate currency? What else might be needed for it to grow
beyond a niche?  

Actually, the valuation isn't a big barrier to adoption. There are already
services that help companies manage the currency exchange risk (you can peg
your prices to dollars, your customers can pay the equivalent amount in
bitcoins, and you get dollars deposited to your bank account), and as the
financial service infrastructure for Bitcoin get more mature that will just
get easier.  
  
Any important new technology grows by starting with successes in some niches
where its advantages are overwhelming; ubiquitous technologies then manage to
slowly grow out of those niches to take over markets where they have a
marginal advantage (either in convenience or price).  
  
That is the pattern we're already seeing with Bitcoin, starting with niches
where the advantages are too large to ignore (e.g. online gaming,
international payments). It remains to be seen whether or not Bitcoin can grow
out of those niches to become a ubiquitous form of payment. In theory, the
value of a currency increases as more people use it. Since the potential
market for Bitcoin is every person connected to the Internet, it could become
more valuable than any national currency that is tied to one specific
geographic region of the planet.  

