One of Bitcoin's major challenges is the legal uncertainty surrounding it.  
  
It is really no different from other new Internet technologies (should Skype
be regulated like a phone company? Does google's deep-linking violate
copyright? ... to give two examples from a few years ago...), but because it
is money there are a lot more laws and regulations that may or may not apply.  
  
It'd be easy to ignore that and just damn the torpedoes, full steam ahead with
the technology. And given the nature of geeks on the Internet, that is what is
going to happen anyway... but I decided it wouldn't hurt to try to be
proactive and start a conversation with my representatives in Washington, DC
about the Bitcoin Project.  
  
So I met briefly with staffers from Rep. Olver and Sen. Brown's offices
yesterday. I gave a very brief overview of bitcoin, mentioned Senator
Schumer's "eradicate Silk Road" press conference, and stressed that Bitcoin is
meant to be a stable, secure, international currency for the Internet, NOT a
currency for criminals.  
  
I also mentioned that the legal uncertainty is a barrier to innovation, and
asked for advice on what, if anything, could be done about that. There is no
good answer-- government moves really slowly, and they're wedging newfangled
Internet ideas into legal structures that were created when telephone were the
latest and greatest technology.  
  
However, the house of representatives staffer I talked with did suggest that
encouraging you-all to introduce yourselves to your congressperson's staff is
a good idea. If they know that interesting, job-creating bitcoin businesses
are happening in their districts and they've met the person making it happen,
then they're **much** more likely to support bitcoin-friendly legislation.  
  
So, if you're an upstanding, law-abiding, clear-thinking citizen doing
interesting things with Bitcoin, I encourage you to take a little time and
introduce yourself to your representative's staff. I wouldn't bother talking
to the representative-- they're probably too old to really understand bitcoin
("Tubes! Money through the tubes I say!"). Talk to a 20-something staffer who
grew up with the Internet and is likely to be a lot more sympathetic to the
idea of a peer-to-peer Internet money.  

