

Quote from: ByteCoin on November 08, 2010, 02:31:22 AM

Prioritizing larger value transactions doesn't really solve the problem
because it's perfectly possible to spam by sending large amounts of bitcoin
from one of your addresses to another ad infinitum.  

  
No, you can't, because every time you send them they become "new", and the
priority is age multiplied by amount:  

Code:

// Priority is sum(valuein * age) / txsize

(valuein is the size of the bitcoin input, age is # of blocks deep, and txsize
is the number of bytes the transaction takes up)  
  

Quote

If you prioritize older transactions, people would be incentivised to split
their bitcoin holdings in such a fashion as to ensure that they do not
generate significant amounts of change when they buy things with bitcoins. If
you hold your bitcoins in powers of 2 * 0.01 then you can pay for anything you
can aford with no change and the least fragmentation. Of course after spending
the money you have to rebalance your holdings as soon as possible. The best
way to do this is not immediately obvious to me. Possibly under certain
circumstances it might be advantageous to generate change as long as you could
specify how you wanted it split up. Possibly powers of 3 might be best for
multiple purchases.  
Anyway, the end effect would be that transactions would have more ins and
outs. Probably the average number of ins and outs would be some very small
multiple (or large fraction) of the log of the number of bitcoin pennies in
the transaction. I estimate that this might increase the average transactions
size by over 10 times.  

  
Ummm... the more you mess around with the coins in your wallet, the newer they
are, and the lower their priority (relative to everybody else who might want
to get their transactions into the next block). I haven't thought deeply about
it, but I bet simply leaving your coins as they are and making change as
necessary will work out best. But please, create your own client and try to
break things on the test network!  
  

