I like bicycles; our family of four owns eight (and a half, if you count my
unicycle). My New Year's resolution for the last 8 or so years has been to
ride my bike more (and like all good New Year's resolutions, I've failed
miserably).  
  
So I feel as if I should love the "Pedal People" who haul trash around
Northampton.  
  

  
What's not to like? They're working hard, getting exercise, keeping a dirty,
polluting garbage truck off the road. And as our local newspaper said in a
recent article, it takes 5 Pedal People to do the work of 1 person and a
garbage truck, so they're great for the economy.  
  
... except they're actually not so great for the economy. True, it takes 5
people to do the work of 1 person plus a truck. But by that logic, it would be
better for the economy to hire 50 people to walk garbage to the dump. It
isn't, because hiring 50 people is more expensive, and the extra 49 people
could spend their time doing something more productive than hauling trash.  
  
Is hauling trash by bike better for the environment? Well, it is a little more
expensive, which means the people hiring the pedal people have less money in
their pockets at the end of the month (comparing prices, looks likes about
~~$1,000~~ $50 per year). If they were going to spend that money on ~~a
vacation in Tahiti~~ gasoline for a trip to a Tea Party rally in Boston then
the bikes are definitely a win for the environment. But if they were going to
donate it to a charity dedicated to preserving the environment or lobbying for
a carbon tax... then it isn't so clear-cut.  
  
My practical, skeptical side thinks hauling trash by bike is probably a bad
idea; I'd love to hear from some Pedal People 10 or 20 years from now to see
if most of them are still riding strong or if they're recovering from knee
replacement operations. But I **do** like bicycles, and if the people riding
the bikes are happy and the people paying them to ride their bikes are happy
maybe I should stop being such a curmudgeon. God knows I spend a fair bit of
my money and time doing things that make me feel good for irrational reasons.
(Go Patriots! 4 and 1!)  

* * *

Edited: I confused the Weekly Pedal People pickup schedule with Monthly
prices. Sorry!

