

Quote from: brucewagner on December 04, 2010, 08:16:04 PM

1\. Why not have both? The market will decide which one people choose to use
most. One might be used more at first, then later as browsers are updated,
site owners might later switch to the other. But.... Are they mutually
exclusive??  

  
Nope, the hard parts aren't parsing the bitcoin: url string (or the file), and
once parsed the same code could do the actual request.  
  

Quote

2\. What's stopping us? Let's just implement them BOTH immediately. We
obviously have the knowledge and expertise to get the job done. Let's just get
the job done already.  

  
The hard part: what happens if I click on a pay-using-bitcoin link and I don't
happen to have bitcoin running right now?  
  
The browser or OS runs bitcoin and hands it the payment request info.  
  
The bitcoin process checks to see if there is already another bitcoin process
running.  
  
Nope. Ok, load the wallet. And then wait until we're caught up fetching the
block chain that we missed while we weren't running. Gotta do that because
some of the transactions in my wallet might have been spent (if you copied
your wallet somewhere), or you might have received payments while bitcoin
wasn't running.  
  
And so N minutes after clicking bitcoin is FINALLY ready to send payment. If N
is greater than 1, then that really sucks!  
  
\---------------  
  
I like click-to-pay, and I want it to work; it would work well now for the
"I'm running bitcoin and connected to the network 24/7" use case. But I don't
think that will be the common use case (most people probably won't bother
generating).  
  
So I think we've got to figure out some clever way of making click-to-pay
quick-- maybe ask for payment permission and then have bitcoin chug away in
the background, popup an alert if there's some problem paying, or just shut
itself down after it's caught up with the block chain and has submitted the
payment. Or, assuming you have enough coins in your wallet, maybe just throw
the transaction onto the network and let peers tell you if you're accidentally
double-spending (that makes me very nervous, though). Or...  

