

Yesterday's post triggered some interesting discussion on reddit and twitter.

I realize now I should have been more specific- when I said "technical
definition of Bitcoin" I meant a couple of things:

I am thinking of what Bitcoin is today and in the near future, not what it
might eventually evolve into. While it is fun to talk about what Bitcoin will
be in 100 years, that wasn't the point of my blog post. I didn't mean to imply
that any definition of what Bitcoin is today and in the near future would
somehow be iron-clad and binding and never change; thinking you can control
how a technology evolves is even sillier than thinking you'll be able to
predict beyond a decade or maybe two.

I also want a definition that could be useful in determining which of two
competing ledgers a neutral geek would point at and say "that one is Bitcoin
as described in the original Bitcoin whitepaper". It is very possible I'm not
seeing the forest for the trees, and I should think of the whole social
infrastructure that is Bitcoin and accept the fact that "Bitcoin" is a human-
generated concept that cannot be pinned down. But I think that's stupid, and
even imperfect definitions can help to bring clarity.

I found two suggestions for modifying the definition interesting. First,
instead of talking about double-SHA256-proof-of-work, just say "chain with
most energy expended on proof of work." I _do_ think that if SHA256 was ever
horribly broken the proof-of-work could change and the result should still be
called  "Bitcoin".

That other is to declare that "Bitcoin" is the ledger starting with the
genesis block that has the biggest market cap (exchange rate times number of
coins) instead of most proof-of-work. That probably matches people's intuitive
notion better than proof-of-work, and if there was some fast, secure way to
determine which branch of the ledger has the larger market cap it would even
be a useful technical/engineering definition.

In practice, the chain with the biggest market cap will be the chain with the
most proof-of-work. I can imagine extremely unlikely scenarios involving
economically irrational miners trying to destroy Bitcoin where that isn't
true, but Bitcoin's two-week difficulty adjustment period makes it expensive
for a minority of hashpower to maintain a split in the blockchain.

