I'm still deep down the Bitcoin rabbit hole, and I've been thinking about its
"store of value" and "means of exchange" properties.  
  
I wonder: if Bitcoin is used as just a store of value and nothing more, could
that be enough?  
  
Imagine it is years in the future, when the generation of new bitcoins has
slowed to a trickle.  
  
As a pure store of value, bitcoins would function as I-owe-you tokens. People
who wanted to store value would buy bitcoins from people who were done using
them to store value and needed some cash to buy something.  
  
The value of a bitcoin would be a function of how many people wanted to store
versus spend. If everybody decided at once they wanted to spend their money
instead of saving it they would find no buyers and the price would drop to
zero.  
  
If lots of people had lots of extra money that they wanted to store (and they
decided bitcoins were a good place to store it) the price of bitcoin would go
up.  
  
I'm not an economist, but I would guess that the desire for a good place to
store value is pretty steady. I base that on the recent behavior of US
Treasuries; people want a safe place to park their money so much that they
have actually driven the inflation-adjusted interest rate on many Treasuries
negative ("investors" are paying the US government to hold their money for
them).  
  
Bitcoins are a pretty darn good store of value; they don't take up any space,
you can back them up, you can protect them with a password, you can split them
up and store them in a lot of different places, and when you want to spend
them you can do it from the comfort of your barcalounger using your cell
phone.  
  
You can even store them in your brain if you want (my brain is too flaky, I
try not to store valuable things in there).  
  
I can imagine that once they grow up bitcoins could have a lot of value purely
as a store of value, even if they never take off as a currency used for
everyday purchases.  
  
I'm sure the overall demand for "store of value" goes up and down, but it
looks to me like it is counter-cyclical-- when the economy is bad, people take
money out of things like the stock market and put it into things like T-Bills
or gold.  
  
If bitcoins are used only as a store of value in the future, then we should
see their value going up during recessions and down during boom times.  
  
If they're used only as a means of exchange then we should see the opposite.  
  
I hope they'll be used for both so they'll have a mostly steady value
regardless of what the economy is doing.  
  
DISCLAIMER: I've been saying this for a couple of years now, but it is still
mostly true:  Bitcoin is an experiment-- only invest time or money in it that
you can afford to lose!  
  

