

Quote from: theymos on October 08, 2014, 05:37:37 AM

Lowering the limit afterward wouldn't be a soft-forking change if the majority
of mining power was creating too-large blocks, which seems possible.  

  
When I say "soft-fork" I mean "a majority of miners upgrade and force all the
rest of the miners to go along (but merchants and other fully-validating, non-
mining nodes do not have to upgrade)."  
  
Note that individual miners (or sub-majority cartels) can unilaterally create
smaller blocks containing just higher-fee transactions, if they think it is in
their long-term interest to put upward pressure on transaction fees.  
  

Quote from: theymos on October 08, 2014, 05:37:37 AM

I think that a really conservative automatic increase would be OK, but 50%
yearly sounds too high to me. If this happens to exceed some residential ISP's
actual bandwidth growth, then eventually that ISP's customers will be unable
to be full nodes unless they pay for a much more expensive Internet
connection. The idea of this sort of situation really concerns me, especially
since the loss of full nodes would likely be gradual and easy to ignore until
after it becomes very difficult to correct.  
  
As I mentioned on Reddit, I'm also not 100% sure that I agree with your
proposed starting point of 50% of a hobbyist-level Internet connection. This
seems somewhat burdensome for individuals. It's entirely possible that Bitcoin
can be secure without a lot of individuals running full nodes, but I'm not
sure about this.  

  
Would 40% initial size and growth make you support the proposal?  
  

Quote from: theymos on October 08, 2014, 05:37:37 AM

  
Determining the best/safest way to choose the max block size isn't really a
technical problem; it has more to do with economics and game theory. I'd
really like to see some research/opinions on this issue from economists and
other people who specialize in this sort of problem.  

  
Anybody know economists who specialize in this sort of problem? Judging by
what I know about economics and economists, I suspect if we ask eleven of them
we'll get seven different opinions for the best thing to do. Five of which
will miss the point of Bitcoin entirely. ("...elect a Board of Blocksize
Governors that decides on an Optimal Size based on market supply and demand
conditions as measured by an independent Bureau of Blocksize Research....")  

