

This is the first house we owned, in Palo Alto, California.  
  
It was tiny. 900 square feet and shaped like a bowling alley.  
  
Taking a virtual walk down the street with Google Street View, I see that the
house two doors down is much, much bigger than it used to be.  
  
Which doesn't surprise me; while we were living there several little houses in
the neighborhood were torn down and replaced by big, multi-million-dollar
properties. Heck, according to zillow.com, that little 900 square foot house
is worth just a little less than a million dollars today.  
  
I wonder if Amherst will be like that in 20 years.  
  
Today, the hot-button issue in Amherst isn't cute little cottages getting torn
down and being replaced by McMansions, it is big old single-family houses
getting turned into rentals for college students. Homeowners in neighborhoods
near UMass are upset that their quiet family-friendly neighborhoods are slowly
turning into absentee landlord slums.  
  
Part of me wants to just say "I told you so." This is what you get when you do
stupid stuff like refuse to allow high-density student rental housing to be
built anywhere near anybody. Amherst Town Meeting members have been pretending
that the students don't exist and that there is no shortage of rental housing
in town for over 40 years.  
  
Fall Town Meeting will debate several zoning articles that are meant to stop
single-family homes from becoming multi-person rentals. I think they would be
effective-- if a property management company needs to get a Special Permit to
turn a single-family home into a multi-person rental then they won't bother
buying any more single-family homes.  
  
I don't know where the students would go; apartment complexes in Hadley or
Sunderland or even further away, I suppose. Hopefully they'll be riding buses
or driving non-polluting self-driving electric cars so we won't see more
pollution or traffic accidents. And hopefully they'll stop and do a bit of
shopping or eating once in a while, so fewer people living near downtown
doesn't mean a less vibrant Town Center.  
  
In the very short-term, I'd expect housing prices to go down a little bit,
since property management companies won't be competing for houses any more.
Less demand means lower prices.  
  
But if I'm right, and if stricter zoning and rental regulations **are**
effective in driving students out of residential neighborhoods, I think prices
for properties near downtown and UMass will eventually rise, because it will
make those neighborhoods a more pleasant place to live.  
  
That neighborhood in Palo Alto is right next to Stanford University, and it
was a great place to live, if you could afford it. Amherst is not the same, of
course-- the main reason that little house is now worth a million dollars is
because Google and Facebook and a gazillion other successful high-tech
companies are nearby.  
  
But I wouldn't be at all surprised to see Town Meeting debating regulations to
limit an epidemic of "tear-down sales" 20 years from now.  
  

