So with the recent avalanche of press interest in bitcoin, I thought I'd share
my thoughts on how I'd like to see bitcoin positioned. I'm not writing this as
"This is the Official Bitcoin Organization Position" -- as always, I expect
everybody to have, and express, their own views.  
  
I'll restate what I see as the goal of The Bitcoin Project: To give us control
over our finances by establishing a stable, secure, global, "democratic"
currency.  
  
I think positioning bitcoin as "revolutionizing the financial system" is the
goal-- not more radical statement I've heard (like "destabilizing
governments"). Most people either like or are indifferent to their governments
(I know, I know, sheeple and all that... lets not go there). I don't think
most people get the warm fuzzies when thinking about bankers and Big
Corporations; bitcoin as "The People's Money" is the right way to think about
it.  
  
Also, whenever I talk to the press, I try to be realistic. Bitcoin is still an
experiment that has never been tried before; there is still a good chance it
will fail, and there is still a lot of work to do to make it stable and
secure. I'm excited because bitcoin is a big idea that might change the world
for the better, but I also realize that our little project is just a baby
compared to the decades-old financial systems that we all use every day.  
  
I think it is important to set expectations; I still wouldn't recommend that
my mom use bitcoin for _anything_ just yet, because it is not easy enough to
use securely. And the road ahead is likely to be bumpy; there will be
technical issues that need fixing, there will be legal questions, there will
be price bubbles, and there will be scams. I predict that some company using
bitcoins to do something illegal will be caught and prosecuted, and that will
be mis-reported as "Bitcoin is illegal."  
  
I said a year ago that creating solid technology was just the first step in a
long road for bitcoin. I'm very pleasantly surprised at how far the bitcoin
project has come in a year; the innovation and experimentation and level of
interest and excitement is fantastic.  
  
  
Here's an email exchange I had with a reporter yesterday:  
  
  
New technologies are always at least a little bit dangerous-- they can usually
be used for both good and bad (think of gunpowder or ChatRoulette), and are
certainly dangerous to the status-quo that they replace (think of cars and
buggy-whip-manufacturers).  
  
Bitcoin is a really ambitious project; we're trying to let people take back
control of their money instead of trusting bureaucrats or bankers or
politicians to keep it stable and safe. It is international, decentralized,
and completely open to innovation, very much like the Internet. Like the
Internet, I expect its early years to be full of amazing successes and
spectacular failures, and I don't think anybody will be able to predict in
advance what will succeed and what will fail.  
  
I think the real question is whether or not bitcoin will appeal to the
majority of people who are happy with our current financial system. If it
doesn't, bitcoin may fade away or end up as a niche currency used for a tiny
percentage of global financial transactions.  

