I have several partly-formed thoughts.  
  
First, on "is there REALLY a problem" -- I think Ed Felten makes a good
argument that, at least in the current world of mining pools, the incentives
work to prevent "selfish" mining: https://freedom-to-
tinker.com/blog/felten/bitcoin-isnt-so-broken-after-all/  
  
Related, I think it is important to remember that the current structure and
behavior of the p2p networking code is NOT part of the fundamental consensus
algorithm. It is easy to change, and, as I've said in the past, I would really
like to see blocks and transactions being broadcast over some completely
different networking protocol.  
  
I think there is a really interesting theoretical question that I don't know
the answer to; I'll try to state it clearly:  
  
As the p2p network is currently implemented, nodes only have a partial view of
competing best-chains, because nodes only relay the first node they see at a
given height.  
  
If there are two blocks at the same height announced at approximately the same
time, they propagate exponentially fast across the network in two waves, and
only the nodes at the edges of where the waves meet will see both blocks.  
  
Given that network behavior, assuming no selfish mining, there is a strong
incentive to announce your block as soon as possible, because in an
exponentially fast race any delay is very likely to make you lose.  
  
There are lots of ideas for fixing selfish mining that rely on changing that
behavior, and having nodes relay orphan blocks. I think it is important to
remember that no matter what rules we SAY the network will follow, we can't
stop individual nodes from implementing whatever rules they wish to follow;
any solution that begins "If all nodes do THIS..." is not a solution.  
  
That applies to the behavior we have now about not relaying orphan blocks,
too, of course. The interesting theoretical question I'm pondering: does the
security of the Bitcoin system depend on the relaying behavior, or on how ties
are resolved in block races?  
  
My intuition is that we SHOULD be relaying all orphan blocks, and should let
each node decide how to resolve races, but before we talk about how to resolve
races I think we should consider the incentives that arise from the current
relaying behavior.  

