

Quote from: runpaint on January 31, 2015, 01:36:01 AM

It's not just connection speed that will prevent normal people from running
Bitcoin; the best internet service I can get at my house has a 250gb monthly
limit.  
  
Also, I'm currently running full nodes on computers with 500GB hard drives. Is
that the message? "Buy bigger computers and move somewhere that offers better
internet service" ?  

  
I think we should target somebody with a "pretty good" computer and a "pretty
good" home internet connection.  
  
And assume that network bandwidth, CPU and storage will continue to grow at
about the rates they've been growing for the last 30 or more years (see the
wikipedia pages on Moore's Law and Nielson's Law for pointers to discussions
on those).  
  
250gb per month is plenty for a 20MB block size  
(20MB every ten minutes times 6 blocks per hour times 24 hours/day times 31
days/month == 90GB; we currently transmit all transaction data twice (haven't
optimized that yet), so double that and you're still well under 250gb per
month).  
  
  
I believe it is _extremely_ important to maintain the fundamental properties
that Satoshi laid out -- because the system he described is the system that
all of us who own bitcoin bought in to.  
  
If the collective decision is to change some of those fundamental properties,
then there must be _extremely_ good reasons to do so.  
  
On the block size issue, Satoshi said on Sun, 02 Nov 2008 on the metz-dowd
cryptography mailing list (in reply to a question about scalability):  

Quote

Long before the network gets anywhere near as large as that, it would be safe
for users to use Simplified Payment Verification (section  to check for double
spending, which only requires having the chain of block headers, or about 12KB
per day. Only people trying to create new coins would need to run network
nodes. At first, most users would run network nodes, but as the network grows
beyond a certain point, it would be left more and more to specialists with
server farms of specialized hardware. A server farm would only need to have
one node on the network and the rest of the LAN connects with that one node.  
  
The bandwidth might not be as prohibitive as you think. A typical transaction
would be about 400 bytes (ECC is nicely compact). Each transaction has to be
broadcast twice, so lets say 1KB per transaction. Visa processed 37 billion
transactions in FY2008, or an average of 100 million transactions per day.
That many transactions would take 100GB of bandwidth, or the size of 12 DVD or
2 HD quality movies, or about $18 worth of bandwidth at current prices.  
  
If the network were to get that big, it would take several years, and by then,
sending 2 HD movies over the Internet would probably not seem like a big deal.

  
When I first heard about Bitcoin, it was small enough I could read everything,
and I did, including all of those mailing list posts. The promise of a system
that could scale up to rival Visa is part of the vision that sold me on
Bitcoin.  
  
I feel bad suggesting that we limit the block size at all, or that the target
be home computers and internet connections -- but I think there are plausible
concerns about centralization risk, and I think starting small and scaling up
as technology advances is a reasonable compromise.  

