

I did some research into money exchanging and money transfer regulations in
the U.S.  
  
The raw legal code is online at:
http://www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/waisidx_08/31cfr103_08.html  
  
I am not a lawyer; trying to understand legalese is just an odd hobby of mine.
From my reading of the regulations, if you exchange less than $1,000.USD worth
of Bitcoin per day you don't have to worry:  
  

Quote

(1) Currency dealer or exchanger. A currency dealer or exchanger (other than a
person who does not exchange currency in an amount greater  
than $1,000 in currency or monetary or other instruments for any person on any
day in one or more transactions).

  
It looks to me like if you exchanged more than $1,000.USD per day a good
lawyer might be able to argue that Bitcoins do not meet the legal definition
of "currency":  

Quote

(h) Currency. The coin and paper money of the United States or of any other
country that is designated as legal tender and that circulates  
and is customarily used and accepted as a medium of exchange in the country of
issuance. Currency includes U.S. silver certificates, U.S. notes and Federal
Reserve notes. Currency also includes official foreign bank notes that are
customarily used and accepted as a medium of exchange in a foreign country.

  
Then again, if Bitcoins are not legally "currency" then it might be left up to
a Court to decide what, exactly, they are, and the result might be really
unpleasant (if a judge decided that they're like stocks and are therefore
subject to regulation by the Security and Exchange Commision you might find
yourself in jail for being an unlicensed stock broker).  
  
I think Bitcoin needs some licensed, regulated exchanges that abide by all the
regulations, treating Bitcoins just like another foreign currency, and make it
really easy to buy or sell a few hundred dollars worth of Bitcoins. The
regulations are not as onerous as I expected; basically you just have to get
identification from customers that make large transactions and report them.

