This is still a big win, since it expands the traffic analyst's task from
determining what goes in and out of a single remailer to what goes in
and out of the entire network.  The per-remailer traffic, for now
and in the forseeable future, is too small to effectively mix traffic
at that level; but traffic across the entire network may soon be
sufficient for that.  We get a reasonable digital mix with over
an order of magnitude less real traffic by using noise messages.

My biggest current concern as an individual, or potential 
business remailer user, is not some super-duper
netwide traffic analysis by giga-bureaucracies that
have much bigger fish to worry about than myself; it is rather
is the _manual_ tracking of message via hacking of remailer 
sites or collusion by remailers, who seem to all
log their messages.  If I was to send out a message I really wanted 
hidden right now, I would generate quite a bit of noise to go along
with it, so that the easy _manual_ tracking of messages that can
practically occur now would be foiled.


Sure they will.  Every bit bucket address adds another node that
the opponent must monitor; most opponents will quickly be overwhelmed
by the task of sniffing out just a few bit-bucket PCs on private "Little 
Garden" style networks.  Most folks who make serious use of remailers (with
nested-encryption scripts, etc.) can also easily set themselves up
as bit-bucket addresses.  Realistic-looking accounts can be set up
at many sites and used as nothing but bit buckets.   (Remailer users
can of course use real addresses at bit buckets right now, but this
is rather rude!)

Noise messages and bit-bucket addresses may not be theoretically
interesting, but the provide major practical improvements.
I challenge cypherpunks to come up with designs for actual software
to distinguish quantized noise messages from real messages that 
can realistically be implemented on the Internet, not just scenarios 
that an extremely strong organization could theoretically implement,
by expending vastly much more effort than remailer users and operators.