There are a number of modern mythologies that severely disturb our ability to
think clearly about law and politics. They encourage lawlessness by sowing
confusion about the law. You may have learned them from high school civics
class, or from newspapers, or from your friends. Indeed, almost all of us take
them for granted, even though they are as fuzzy and false as the tooth fairy.
These statements and phrases are legally meaningless and politically muddle-
headed, but people often utter them as if they were as obvious as the sun in
the sky.  
  
(1) "...the government..." -- But there is no such thing as the government
outside of a totalitarian government like Stalinist Russia. (Actually, even
Stalinist Russia was divided into Republics). In the U.S. we have a federal
government, state governments, counties, cities, transit districts, and so on.
Mall security can arrest shoplifters and in many states the resident of a
house can legally shoot burglars. None of these have arbitrary power, although
people often think or act as if states or the federal government or the
President himself do or should. This phraseology is related to the
totalitarian doctrine of internal sovereignty. Besides federalism and
separation of powers, another historical way to avoid this totalitarianism was
jurisdiction as property. A related myth I hear comes from my fellow American
civilians whose commutes are too long. They have drunk too deeply of the talk
radio kool-aid and call President Bush "our Commander-in-Chief." If you check
the U.S. Constitution, you will see that President Bush is Commander-in-Chief
of the U.S. armed forces only. This phrase, with "the government", may reflect
overuse of a biological instinct to think we live in one tribe and follow a
single tribal alpha male.  
  
(2) "We have a social contract." -- But the principle behind much law of
contract formation, such as the Statute of Frauds, is that any contracts
involving momentous things, like real property, should be carefully considered
and consented to by each person bound -- the rationale behind requiring that
the important parts of real estate contracts be initialed and the entirety
signed. Politics is pretty important, so -- where did I sign? Where did I
initial my approval for the income tax, zoning laws, and our military
adventures? There is also the only slightly more plausible fiction of a
claiming that jurisdiction is a voluntary relationship as a matter of
constructive contract or restitution which I debunk here. Lysander Spooner
also long ago debunked social contract theory. Governments do indeed have the
legal authority to tax, to make and enforce laws, and so on, but this
authority is certainly not derived from any sort of contract with those they
rule. Furthermore, citizens generally have no legal rights whatsoever to be
protected by any government from any sort of violence (except, sometimes,
violence by that government itself), even though that has been said to be the
main purpose of government. To the extent government might be justified in
common law terms, property and corporate law are much more realistic starting
points. (Note that the full form of this phrase usually involves the
abominable combination of two mythologies: "We have a social contract with the
government.")  
  
(3) "It's the will of the people" -- But who are "the people"? By what magical
group mind and group mouth do they express their "will"? This is another
phrase that is legally meaningless and politically muddle-headed. There are a
number of related nonsense-phrases, e.g. "the consent of the governed", used
as a justification for enforcing oppressive laws on the many persons who did
not consent.  
  
So why follow the law, besides the obvious utilitarian considerations like not
wanting to be punished? We should follow the law for the same reasons our
ribosomes follow our genetic code. Both law and the genetic code are inherited
information that we need first to survive, then to thrive. They are both often
highly evolved, with highly improbable functions that are often difficult or
impossible to understand. Laws are blueprints providing the basic structure
for social interactions, just as genes code for the interactions between cells
and even some of the basic interactions between individuals. To the extent
political nonsense-phrases interfere with a clear understanding of the law and
law enforcement, they destroy what many millenia of cultural evolution has
built.  
  
(This post was proximately inspired by discussions I have been having with one
Mencius Moldbug here, here, and here).

