JSBolton: I agree there is far more to book consciousness than just having a
printing press. The printing press was a necessary but not sufficient
condition for the wide spread of literacy and the consequent revolutions in
organization and culture. The Florentines were able to have a relatively minor
and very temporary revolution just prior to the printing press through a large
merchant community speaking and writing a common vernacular, reflected in e.g.
Dante.  
  
anonymous 1: I'm not sure the Bible was really the "killer app." Gutenburg and
Fust probably made more money by selling Donatus' Latin grammar, widely used
in universities. Fust's background was as a (previously manuscript) book
seller to universities.  
  
If I had to pin down three key differences between East Asia and European
reception of printing they'd be (1) a small phonetic alphabet is more suited
to printing and was already standard and widely used in Europe, (2) the
decentralized nature of European printing business (Europe within a couple
decades of Gutenburg had many competing printers not directly controlled by a
government or religious organization), and (3) the widespread nature of
European learning -- especially the universities and the already literate
merchants. The need for unversities in turn was driven by the almost uniquely
European need for those much-maligned lawyers. There's a strong relationship
here to the European adversarial legal system (as opposed to bureacratic legal
systems dominant in Asia). Remind me to write about that some time. :-)  
  
anonymous 2: The Bardi supercompany was quite exceptional and didn't last very
long. You'd have a very hard time finding any other examples in the entire
stretch of civilization from the Sumerians in 3,000 BC until the European 16th
century where Dunbar number (really a range between about 100 and 200 people
where organization becomes quite difficult) was exceeded for any long period
of time by a commercial organization. The Dutch East India Company, with its
managers and most of its employees raised on the same common language due to
printing, was the first company to do so, and quite exceptionally so (it had
by the 17th century over 10,000 employees if I recall correctly) and many
other companies (mostly English) soon followed within a century.  
  
This radical change in the ability of businesses to organize employees the
leads directly to European empires, and later to the industrial revolution. It
cries out to be explained. It corresponds to the rise of literacy in a common
language. The most likely cause is the expansion of the perceived "ethnic
boundary" created by language (as Steve Sailer and others have discussed) or
the "tribal illusion" and resulting network of easily trusted people (as I
have discussed, heretofore independently). This phenomenon explains the
exceptional (but comparatively very humble) pre-printing-press example of the
Florentine supercompanies as well. But had it not been for the printing press
that Renaissance, like many earlier ones, would have died and been largely
forgotten.  
  
The Dunbar number is important in all this because it's a psychological limit
on how many people we can get to know well enough to develop the long-term
relationships needed for solid trust. Google for "Christopher Allen" and
"Dunbar number" -- Chris is a modern venture capitalist and researcher of
social networks who has observed that corporate culture changes radically as
the size of organizations grow larger and in particular as they exceed the
Dunbar range.  
  
Before the European printing press commecial organizations almost never exceed
the Dunbar number. You've named one of the very small set of exceptions I know
of, the early 14th century "supercompanies", which only barely and temporarily
exceed the Dunbar range. This was probably made possible by the unusually high
level of literacy in a common language (reflected by e.g. Dante writing in the
vernacular) among the Florentines.

