James Hamilton (link below) commits an egregious, but all too common, error:  

> Yet another example, and the one people often think of first, would be if
there is a higher inflation rate in the U.S. than Europe. In that case we
might expect to see an increase in the price of oil that exactly equals (in
percentage terms) the decrease in the value of the dollar...The graph below
plots the cumulative logarithmic change since 1999 in the dollar price of one
euro along with the dollar price of one barrel of oil...

Hamilton then computes correlation coefficients between dollar oil prices and
the euro/dollar exchange rate, finds a number of periods in which they are not
closely correlated, and concludes that the dollar does not explain most of the
dramatic rise in oil prices. Why do we keep seeing this kind of reasoning from
supposed authorities like Mr. Hamilton? The flaw should be quite obvious, but
since I've seen it mindlessly and repeatedly perpetrated by a number of
professors of economics over the last few months, allow me to tediously
correct it: if greater inflation is expected in _both_ the euro and the
dollar, the price of oil will increase in  both euros and dollars. The
euro/dollar exchange rate reflects relative monetary changes between the
dollar and the euro, and the monetary component of the dollar oil price
reflects absolute monetary changes in the dollar. It is absurdly illogical to
expect the relative and the absolute to be strongly correlated. If the
monetary changes in the euro and the dollar are of similar magnitude and
direction, oil and gold prices will go up or down for these monetary reasons
while the exchange rate changes little for these reasons. If European and U.S.
monetary authorities are reacting in similar ways to, for example, similar
credit crunches, there is no reason to expect a substantial correlation
between euro/dollar exchange rates and oil prices. We will see such
correlation for monetary reasons only when they are reacting with
substantially different magnitudes or in different directions.  
  
In expectation terms, the euro/dollar exchange rate reflects relative
inflation expectations and surprise relative inflation between the dollar and
the euro, whereas the monetary component of the dollar oil price reflects
absolute inflation expectations and surprise absolute inflation for the
dollar.  
  
Analyzing the weekly price quotes since 2000, I get a correlation coefficient
of 0.93 between the dollar price of gold and the dollar price of oil -- both
absolute measures of dollar inflation expectations and surprise dollar
inflation. The alternative hypotheses, changes in expectations and surprises
in technological/geological supply or industrial demand, have very different
effects on gold and oil that should lead to low correlations between their
prices. The high correlation between gold and oil implies that oil as well as
gold price changes are dominated by monetary factors. Many professional
economists seem to be in denial about these basics of life under fiat
currencies, perhaps since this ruins using the highly visible gas prices for
simple chapter 1 lessons about how the fundamentals of consumption demand and
supply by themselves are supposed to fully determine prices. These chapter 1
exercises, besides neglecting expectations, assume fixed-value currencies, and
spectacularly fail for mineral commodities in our world of fiat currencies. In
that world there is a monetary component to mineral commodity prices
exponential in size to the expected inflation rate. This monetary component
always dominates the gold price and at more than minimal levels of expected
inflation (i.e. > ~2%/year) it also dominates oil prices, as demonstrated by
the high correlation between gold and oil prices since 2000.  
  
[UPDATE: another thing that puzzles many economists is why oil consumption has
not dramatically slackened, and indeed in some areas has still risen, in
response to climbing oil prices. This demand puzzle is a problem for any
theory, whether monetary or fundamental. The answer involves demand
fundamentals, but does _not_ involve fundamentals that have _changed_
substantially in the last decade: demand forms a fairly constant backdrop for
the monetarily-driven dramatic rise in oil prices; it does not itself explain
the rise. The answer to the demand puzzle is that despite all the recent
political sci-fi rhetoric to the contrary, oil is a superior form of energy,
often with no economical ready substitutes, as well as a great chemical
feedstock. Automobiles in particular give us quite valuable real options that
the vast majority of us actively seek and are extremely reluctant to give up.
When gas prices go up we cut back on luxuries and many other kinds of
necessities to make room for greater gas expenditures. Alternatives are
typically costly status items, like hybrids, that are not practical
substitutes for most people. As a result the demand for oil is far less
elastic than for most commodities. Furthermore, because the dramatic oil price
rise of the last decade is largely a monetary not a fundamental effect, the
costs of alternative energies and conservation are also inflating -- they are
simply much stickier than oil prices and will thus lag but eventually catch up
to them. Investments in them will turn out far worse than a mere fundamental
analysis would indicate, and enough people remember the 1970s, and how tacky
and dangerous the small cars everybody bought in the late 1970s and early
1980s seemed by the late 1980s, that this has made people more reluctant to
buy small or alternative in the current runup. Adding to oil's inelasticity
are the many countries that subsidize fuel consumption.  
  
Observe that this inelasticity and these subsidies, while important for
explaining the demand puzzle, have not changed substantially as dollar oil
prices have climbed by more than a factor of 10 since 1998. The component of
the demand curve reflecting fundamentals has gradually risen, but it has also
risen by a similar proportion in many prior decades and can't explain any
dramatic increase in oil prices. What has changed are inflation expectations,
driven by increasing government deficits and expected central bank behavior in
response to the credit crunch, among other monetary factors. Our higher oil
and gold prices reflect, exponentially, the increase in these expectations.]  
  
(Here's the link to Hamilton's erroneous analysis, H/T Marginal Revolution,
and my comments above were originally made at that blog, and appear here
slightly edited).  
  
Here are two graphs I've recently made based on my historical studies of the
relationships between inflation, long-term inflation expectations, gold, and
oil (click to enlarge):  
  
  
  
The first graph shows implied expected inflation based on historical weekly
gold and oil prices, 2000-2008. The oil and gold prices are adjusted for an
estimate of historical inflation (specifically inflation as measured by CPU-I
up to the date of the price, as opposed to inflation expected after the date
of the price, which these adjusted prices imply) and for a small fundamental
long-term trend (see below). The absolute expected inflation is based on
certain baseline assumptions, whereas the relative changes in inflation
expectations are not based on these parameters but simply on the theory that
the oil and gold prices reflect the net present value of expected inflation,
which is an exponential function. There is a close correlation, specifically
0.93, between the weekly movements of gold and oil prices in this period. The
expectations implied by oil include both monetary component reflected by this
correlation as well as a much smaller component primarily reflecting differing
expectations and surprises between gold and oil in industrial demand and
technologicaly/geological supply.  
  
The separate oil (in gold prices) expectation graph reflects this difference.
My attribution of all the differences between gold and oil to these
fundamentals assumes that there has been insignificant change in the relative
demand for gold and oil _as money_ , which may be dubious assumption give the
great recent rise in the use of oil and other commodity derivatives to hedge
inflation in investment portfolios, and also the possibility that the security
of economic property rights (i.e. effective long-term control by the same
entity) in oil has increased recently faster than that of gold. But the
fundamental contribution to the price of oil in terms of gold must be
substantial since the graph of the difference in price expectations between
the two reflects major events impacting oil demand such as 9/11(which along
with the recession from the dot-com crash greatly impacted world and
especially U.S. travel, reducing oil demand).  
  
A few potentially important monetary events, such as the appointment of Ben
Bernanke to replace Alan Greenspan as Fed chairman, are also labeled. There is
a significant increase in the both the level and volatility of inflation
expectations around and after this appointment as the market tried to predict
how inflationary Fed policy under Bernanke might become, and generally
indicated that higher inflation could be expected from Bernanke than
Greenspan. Even before Bernanke was chosen, the ballooning federal deficits
after 9/11 caused a gradual but substantial increase in inflation expectations
from then until the end of Greenspan's term. Over his entire leadership from
1987 to 2006, Greenspan lowered inflation expectations from about 4% to below
2%, and they then rose to about 2 1/2% by the end of Greenspan's term, and are
back above 4% today. (Greenspan in his own book, _The Age of Turbulence_ ,
published in 2007, says that with fiat currencies we can expect inflation of
about 4.5% from here on out, a more pessimistic estimate than that probably
implied by gold prices in 2007, but perhaps a bit more prescient than the
market given that inflation expectations have increased to above 4% in 2008.
Of course, remember that my model reflects changes in inflation expectations
much better than absolute inflation expectations, so these absolute numbers
are very approximate).  
  
Not shown on these graphs is a very interesting possible difference of nearly
1% between inflation expectations implied by gold, recently a bit over 4%, and
expectations implied by TIPS (U.S. Treasury bonds with returns adjusted by the
U.S. CPU-I inflation index), recently 3.3% The difference may largely reflect
the errors I have suggested might exist in my absolute (but not relative)
numbers due to my choices of parameters, but they might also reflect one or
more of the following:  
  
(1) The difference between the consumption basket of the U.S. urban consumer
(as reflected in the CPU-I) and a global consumption basket;  
  
(2) Understatement of actual subjectively experienced inflation by the CPU-I
formual based on errors in its formula, perhaps including the "hedonic" and
other adjustments made to it in recent years (we don't have TIPS prices to
measure differences in gold- and TIPS-implied inflation prior to 2005);  
  
(3) subtleties involving discount rate and utility curve differences between
the U.S. urban consumer and some global average; and/or  
  
(4) Prices on the 10-year TIPS reflect inflation expectations only over the
next 10 years, whereas gold reflects inflation expectations over an
indefinetely long period. If some event (e.g. the baby boomers reaching years
of requiring peak medical attention, causing U.S. government deficits to
skyrocket) posing great inflation risks is expected to occur within a
foreseeable period of time but not within the next 10 years, this could be
reflected in a spread between the two implied expectations.  
  
There is also a small component of long-term relative oil/gold fundamentals in
my analysis. Since the 1950s, oil prices have increased on average 0.9%/year
faster than gold, which I have attributed to a fundamental difference between
the two: a greater proportion of oil is actually consumed every year than
gold, and so oil is gradually (i.e. at 0.9%/year) becoming scarcer relative to
demand than gold. The graphs and implied inflations are adjusted for this
effect. This is as close the numbers attribute any reality to "peak oil"
theories: they show that we do not face an imminent demise of the oil economy,
only a very long and very gradual increase in the technological/geological
scarcity relative to consumption demand for oil. Extrapolating the same rate
as the last 50 years, the price of oil in terms of gold will take 80 years to
double. Taking out monetary factors and this gradual effect, we have had in
the recent years (indeed since 1999, although until about 2003 this was masked
by low inflation expectations) a small acute crisis in the fundamentals of
oil, rising a bit above the 0.9%/year trend as it did in the 1970s, but this
burp not substantially greater than in many former years such as in the 1970s,
and I expect it, as occured in the 1980s, to reverse from technological
substitutes for and conservation of oil which we are currently (as in the late
1970s and early 1980s) overinvesting in, due to monetary effects on oil prices
being mistaken for fundamental ones. This mistake will reify as alternative
energies and conservation techniques (barring unexpected technological
breakthroughs), with stickier prices lagging those of oil in reflecting
inflation expectations, increase in price _faster_ than oil in the next decade
(assuming no further monetary problems that further increase inflation
expectations and thus oil prices). Prices besides oil, gold, and to a lesser
extend other mineral commodities are far stickier than those mineral prices.
Once inflation expectations increase, it takes many years for other prices
(and especially the stickiest prices of all, wages) to catch up to oil and
gold: these other prices greatly lag both increases and decreases in oil and
gold prices, and indeed may never catch up at all if the expectations turn out
to be wrong (as they indeed often are, given how little information the market
actually has on future U.S. government and Fed behavior!)  
  
The second graph shows this expected versus the actual (or at least CPI-U)
dollar inflation from 1968 to today. Again from the difference between oil and
gold we can see some oil fundamentals such as the impact of the Asian/Russian
crisis on lowering oil prices (in terms of gold as well as, in this case,
dollars, as inflation expectations were also at their lowest) in 1998 and of
the Iran/Iraq war which depressed oil prices in terms of gold in the 1980s
(probably due to decreased security of long-term economic property rights in
their oil and the need by these oil states to fund their war with limited
ability to borrow).  
  
Since I generated these graphs three weeks ago, there has been a substantial
and as usual correlated drop in both dollar gold and oil prices, probably
reflecting an easing of the credit crunch in the U.S. and more confidence that
the Fed, seeing its inflationary behavior lead to immediate and politically
consequential pain at the gas pump, is less likely to use high inflation to
default on current U.S. debts than was thought in previous weeks. At the same
time the overt default risk for Treasuries has nearly tripled, also reflecting
some new political limits on inflationary default. By the way, in the most
recent week the dollar also strengthened against the euro by a similar amount,
so that the explanation for last week, but not most of the previous ones,
involves a monetary improvement unique to the dollar rather than shared by the
Fed and the ECB.  
  
  
[UPDATE: here's a third graph showing implied inflation expectations derived
from monthly quotes of gold and oil in dollars going back to 1974, using some
different parameters than were used for the second graph econd graph. The two
expectations have a correlation coefficient of 0.76. (I forgot to run the
correlation with the parameters that generated the second graph, so I wanted
to show the graph corresponding to the 0.76). This is still a strong
correlation consistent with the long-term trends in oil and gold prices each
reflecting a common estimate of future inflation -- gold and oil fundamentals
are very different and so cannot lead to such strong correlation. This
compared to two random walks with no long-term tendency to rise, which on
average have no correlation.  
  
Per the comments below, the 0.93 coefficient cited above might for statistical
reasons suggest much more correlation than actually there due to the rising
nature of both making the differences from the mean calculated in the
coefficient consistently large and thus reducing the proportional difference
in movements: a random walk that tends to rise can also have correlation
coefficients in the .60's to .90's. Indeed taking correlations of differences
we get only .25, on the high end of weak positive correlations, for one-week
deltas, but this rises with the weeks of difference: I've calculated up to 40
week deltas which give 0.64, a strong correlation. This suggests that weekly
fluctuations are dominated more by non-monetary factors and the monetary
factors don't start to dominate until the price movements are over about 6
months: fundamental fluctuations tend to be shorter term and tend (except for
the 0.9% secular trend for which I've adjusted the data) cancel each other
out. There are also as I undestand it, and I am admittedly no statistical
expert, statistical reasons to expect that the 0.25 is too low in that such
differencing can exagerate noise. For the two implied inflation expectations
in the third graph, which have a 0.76 correlation coefficient, the
exageratedly small differences in proportion due to large distances from the
mean should be greatly reduced since the series is largely flat, finishing
pretty much where it started. But all this must be subject to review by people
far more knowledge in statistics than I. :-) ]

