Michael: _Your proof...only holds for the scenarios in which the prior
allocation of rights permits coercion._  
  
Of course, but as I observed, externalities are not readily separable from
coercion. Externalities problems always come bundled with at least a small
threat of coercion. (BTW the term externalities does apply _ex ante_ \-- the
externalities problem already exists, either in actual act or in threat or
both, and Coase is trying to solve the externality problem by contract). The
assumption is even worse for anarcho-capitalists, who can't take for granted
any sort of ambient property and tort law that magically causes coercion to
vanish, as Coase seems to have done. The fact of the matter is that the
assumptions of the Coase Theorem as it is commonly used, especially by
anarcho-capitalists, contradict each other. Coase may have nominally or
casually "recognized" this problem, but neither Coase nor any other users of
this Theorem as far as I am aware have seriously addressed this problem or
tried to resolve it. (Although I have been told that Friedman tried to tackle
this problem in _Law's Order_ \-- I haven't read it -- if somebody would care
to put forward any such argument I'd be happy to address it). Instead invokers
of the Coase Theorem happily go on deducing their conclusions from a false
theorem, usually in a context where coercion can be an important problem.  
  
Coase himself, after (as with George) observing the importance and ubiquity of
transaction costs, did come to what I consider the proper theoretical
conclusion, that the prior allocation should give the legal duty to the lower
cost avoider of the externality. (i.e. the legal right goes to the party who
would have the higher cost to prevent the harm). By lucky accident this also
seems to solve the coercion problem, but Coase arrived at this good answer by
bad reasoning. And neoclassical anarcho-capitalists depend on the false
Theorem, not Coase's conclusion based on the ubiquity of transaction costs,
for their argument that a legal system can be constructed from contracts.  
  
George: _The practical point would seem to be that if rights are cheaply
transferable it's much more important that questions of right, once decided
upon, are considered permanently settled than what the particular decisions
are._  
  
Since this is a deduction from the Theorem, and the Theorem is false, I
seriously question this conclusion, especially in the context of anarcho-
capitalism and more generally the degree to which political systems can be
established and maintained on a voluntary basis.  
  
While I quite agree that the permanancy of legal rights is very important, I
also believe that even in the absence of transaction costs, when negotiating a
contract the _ex ante_ legal rights matter, and deeply so, to economically
efficient outcomes, because of the problem of coercion. Transaction costs and
the problem of coercion are both important reasons that there is no "market"
in legal procedure, nor any "market" in externalities unless in the case of
the latter a sophisticated property and tort or criminal law already exists.
To take another Coaseian example, private trade in radio spectrum requires
criminal or tort laws that punish at least jamming, and often also lesser but
known forms of interference as well, as well as monitoring (either private or
public) to detect such trespass. Mere contracts negotiated against the
backdrop of law (or lack thereof) that allows parties to jam each other will
probably lead to very poor outcomes.

