  
  
Some development economists such as Hernando de Soto and Craig Richardson have
stressed the crucial role of property rights in building wealth within and
developing beyond an agricultural economy. In particular they emphasize the
importance of recorded titles that allow property to be reliably pledged as
collateral. In the above reference Craig Richardson reports in particular
about how the recent deprivation of property rights in Zimbabwe led to the
collapse of that economy. His statistical analysis eliminates substantial
contributions from other hypothesized causes of that collapse, such as the
minor drought. Richardson cites the observations of contemporaries that
despite the drought, dams in Zimbabwe remained full. Irrigated farmlands had
not been planted and fertilized properly in the first place and irrigation
equipment had often been looted. Richardson traces these symptoms to the lack
of incentives to properly raise crops and lack of seasonal loans to fund
planting, fertilization, and irrigation, both consequent of uncertain property
titles.  
  
The importance for development of being able to use property as collateral is
confirmed by Western Europe's own experience, starting in the late medieval
era, in developing wealth within the agricultural economy and using
agricultural wealth to finance ventures beyond agriculture. During this period
Western Europe, and in particular the city-states of Italy, developed a wide
variety of new kinds of contracts that provided the legal foundations for
business ventures, loans, insurance, and a wide variety of other structures.
Insurance, for example, enabled Europeans to mount unprecedented overseas
ventures of trading an empire-building. In de Soto's terminology, Western
Europe coverted "dead capital" of agricultural land and other fixed wealth
into the "live capital" of manufacturing and overseas ventures.  
  
Many of these contracts were based on collateral clauses. For example,
commenda contracts allowed an investor (who was "sleeping," like a creditor,
and thus had limited liability like a creditor, but unlike a creditor would be
paid a share of profits) to fund the purchase of ships and goods and other
financing of trading voyages. As early as 1073, the recipient of a commenda
investment pledged "if I do not observe everything just as is stated above, I,
together with my heirs, then promise to give and to return to you and your
heirs everything in the double, both capital and profit, [i.e. the capital and
profit plus again as much as a penalty], out of my land and my house or out of
anything I am known to have in this world." Simimlarly other kinds of business
venture investments, loans, insurance, and a wide variety of other contracts
used in the Italian city-states were usually underpinned by pledges of land,
goods, or both.  
  
During the late Middle Ages Europeans cities started developing municipal
records for recording these "security interests" in land and chattels. These
allowed future creditors to check and see whether goods or real estate were
already pledged. Along with these developments came the commercial innovations
that made the industrial revolution and subsequent wealth of the West
possible.  
  
In our era a wide variety of kinds of property would benefit from distributed
property title databases that reduce dependence on particular government
offices for the security of property titles.  
  
Image: Instruments for surveying property boundaries, from ancient Rome.
Courtesy Deutches Museum, Munich Germany.

