Given that I subscribe to the law of the dominant paradigm, I have a soft spot
in my heart for ideas that haven't gotten the attention they deserve. I try to
choose such ideas to blog on. But I can't give all such ideas that I know of
the necessary attention. Here are some:  
  
Richard Dawkins himself is by now overexposed, but in his quest to convert the
world to the atheist meme he, along with most of the rest of the world, has
neglected his own theory of the extended phenotype. Like the metaphor of the
selfish gene, this is an insight with many very important consequences. So far
we've just scratched the tip of this iceberg.  
  
Yoram Barzel is one of the most important economists of the last half century,
but few people know this. Along with the much more famous Friedrich Hayek,
Barzel is probably the economist who has influenced me the most. He has had a
number of important insights related to transaction costs which I've confirmed
repeatedly in my own observations and readings in economic history. Probably
his most important insights relate to the importance and nature of value
measurement. (“Measurement Cost and the Organization of Markets,” Journal of
Law and Economics, April 1982 Reprinted in The Economic Foundations of
Property Rights: Selected Readings, SPejovich, ed., Edward Elgar Publishing
Company, 1997. And in Transaction costs and Property rights, Claude Menard,
Editor, Edward Elgar publishing Company, 2004.) Another is his analysis of
waiting in line (queuing) versus market prices as two methods of rationing.
Waiting in line is the main means of rationing in a socialist economy but is
surprisingly widespread even in our own. (“A Theory of Rationing by Waiting,”
Journal of Law and Economics, April 1974 Reprinted in Readings in
Microeconomics, Breit, Hochman, and Sauracker, 3rd ed., 1986).  
  
Advanced cryptography over the last twenty-five years has come with a large
number of important protocols. Public key encryption got all the hype, but it
was just a warm-up. Alas, the perceived esoteric nature of the field and
magical function of its protocols has apparently intimidated regular
programmers away from implementing most of them. Appearances to the contrary
they are based on solid math, not magic. I've blogged on some of these, but
there is far more out there waiting to be picked up by mainstream computer
security. Of all the advanced cryptography protocols secure time-stamping and
multiparty secure computation are probably the most important.  
  
The ideas of voluntary oblivious compliance and admonition systems from the
capability security community. These are very useful in elucidating
interelationships between wet protocols (e.g. manual procedures and law) and
security. (By contrast I think capability security itself, and indeed the
entire area of access control, is over-hyped: there are important roles for
such things, for example in internal corporation access control, secure
operating systems, and services where trust by all parties in corporate
systems administrators is satisfactory, but they are nowhere close to being
the be-all and end-all of distributed computing as often seems to be implied.
Rather it's advanced cryptography where the most important advances in
distributed security lie).  
  
The whole topic of franchise jurisdiction, crucial to understanding medieval
and Renaissance English law, has nevertheless long been almost completely
neglected. It is also a very different paradigm of the power of courts that
has been forgotten by the modern legal and political communities in favor of
the Roman model of governmental sovereignty.  
  
Almost any topic that requires knowledge from more than one academic specialty
has been overly neglected: so much so that most such topics don't even exist
but should.  
  
The specific ideas mentioned are just the tip of the iceberg of
underappreciated topics. Please let me know what ideas you think have been the
most underappreciated. There are, I'm sure, many, many ideas out there that I
should know about but don't.

