Our Constitution, while admirable in many respects, has some deep flaws,
especially the federal court structure. But given the flawed court structure,
it has developed one very redeeming feature: the Incorporation Doctrine. Under
this doctrine, said by the Supreme Court to be implied from the 14th Amendment
clause requiring States to respect due process, the federal Bill of Rights is
applied as a limitation on States. This doctrine has allowed federal courts to
enforce many individual rights against state governments, which state courts
have far less incentive to do, even though similar or the same rights are
written into most state constitutions. Combined with the doctrine that the
Bill of Rights means the same thing when applied to States as they do when
applied against the federal government, (the Same-Scope Doctrine -- an
assumption that on original meaning grounds is perhaps flawed), it has also
given the federal courts far more incentive to enforce the Bill of Rights
against the federal government itself.  
  
A brief further explanation of the basic flaws in both federal and state
courts are in order. These courts are selected by the legislatures and
executive whose power they interpret. This gives a strong selection bias
(similar to adverse selection in economics, but involving the choices of third
parties). When on the bench, operational bias (analogous to moral hazard in
economics) biases verdicts towards increasing both federal power and the
rights of other parties as narrow exceptions to those powers in order to
increase the number and importance of disputes, and thereby increase the
importance of the federal courts. The same logic applies to state courts
interpreting the powers of state legislatures and executives under state
constitutions.  
  
An example of selection bias at work: you will almost always see Senators ask
judicial nominees their opinion on the Commerce Clause. To be approved, the
nominee cannot declare an intention to overturn preposterous interpretation by
which "commerce among the States" includes growing marijuana or wheat in your
own backyard for your own consumption. If a nominee does not declare
allegience to this legal monstrosity, which has vastly increased the power of
the President and Senate, most Presidents and Senates will not allow him on
the federal bench. (The occassional joker, like Justice Thomas, does slip past
both the President and Senate, but it's very rare).  
  
Before the Incorporation Doctrine and the same-scope assumption, federal
courts rarely enforced the Bill of Rights against the federal government. They
enforced the small handful of limitations on the States in the original
Constitution far more zealously. The combination of selection and operational
biases produces this result -- the federal courts want to inrease their
influence by enforcing rights, but have to commit to Senators (and often the
President) who select them to not enforce them strongly against federal
legislative or executive acts. They don't need to commit to States -- the
States are not a source of selection bias -- so they can exercise their power
freely by enforcing rights against the States.  
  
Thus the federal courts have always been eager to enforce individual rights
against the States, but very reticent to do so against the federal government.
The Incorporation Doctrine and the same-scope assumption cause the federal
courts to enforce the Bill of Rights against the federal government, going
against their selection bias, as a price they are willing to pay to enforce a
larger set of rights against the States.  
  
A much better solution for keeping governmental powers in check and rights
protected would be to have federal courts interpret state constitutions, and
set up a new super-federal court, selected completely independently of federal
politicians, to interpret the U.S. Constitution. Until such radical
modification, the Incorporation and Same-Scope doctrines are crucial to
incentivizing federal courts to enforce the Bill of Rights today.

