The Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) governed Iraq between April 2003 and
June 2004. Despite the governmental powers it wielded, its legal nature is
"shrouded in ambiguity," according to federal district court Judge T.S. Ellis
III. This Congressional Report concurs.  
  
The issue made it to court due to a lawsuit against various CPA contractors.
The issue was whether the CPA was a U.S. federal agency, and thus the CPA's
contractors federal government contractors. Judge Ellis held that the
plaintiffs could not prove that they were. (Incidentally, some of these
contractors, such as Custer Battles LLC, are also interesting entities:
private companies apparently wielding some governmental and military powers
delegated from the CPA. But that will have to be a subject for another time.
First we have to figure out what the authority was that CPA had to grant).  
  
Was the CPA created by President Bush as a separate federal agency in a
National Security Directive? Was it a division of the United States Department
of Defense as the Department of Justice now argues? Was it a United Nations
agency created pursuant to a U.N. Security Council directive? Was it as Paul
Krugman calls it a "private fiefdom"? Was it a private contractor wielding
today's version of the colonial franchise? Was it a government created by a
secret charter? (Imagine if the U.S. Constitution was a state secret. I can't
do it, but let's try). Or -- most likely of all -- was it simply an ad-hoc
creation based on no good legal procedure whatsoever? According to Judge
Ellis, "....there is no formal document – whether statute, United Nations
Security Council resolution, or other organic document – that plainly
establishes the CPA or provides for its formation." The Congressional report
agrees: " Detailed information that explicitly and clearly identifies how CPA
was established, by whom, and under what specific authority, is not readily
available."  
  
The CPA's direct predecessor in governing Iraq was the Office of
Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance (ORHA). The ORHA is the product of
the still-classified National Security Presidential Directive (NSPD) 24 in
January 2003. Its first head, retired Lieutenant General Jay Garner, was
apparently hired by the Secretary Defense. A news story stated that he would
report to the commander of the U.S. Central Command, who was at the time
General Tommy Franks. But Garner's position description stated:  
  

> This Office [ORHA] is established at the direction of the President of the
United States, and is located for administrative purposes under Boards,
Commissions and Task Forces, Washington Headquarters Services. This Office is
under the supervision of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy.

Garner's tenure was short-lived as the OHRA was within two months replaced by
the CPA:  
  

> On May 13, 2003, the Secretary of Defense designated Ambassador Bremer as
CPA Administrator. The first regulation issued by Ambassador Bremer, dated May
16, 2003, identified him as Administrator of CPA. The authority’s Inspector
General (IG) stated, in his initial report to Congress, that OHRA became CPA
in May 2003. However, a March 2004 DOD IG report stated that the Deputy
Secretary of Defense, in a June 16, 2003, memorandum, dissolved ORHA and
shifted ORHA’s functions, responsibilities, and legal obligations to CPA.

The senior officials of the CPA were various active and retired U.S. military
officers, U.S. ambassadors, and a liason from the U.S. Agency for
International Development (USAID).  
  
NPSD 36 in May 2004 retroactively defined the CPA as a "temporary
organization" under 5 U.S.C. § 3161. But it is still unknown under what "law
or Executive order," if any, the CPA was established so as to qualify as a
"temporary organization."  
  
In a report to Congress the Office of Management and Budget stated the
following:  
  

> The Administrator of the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) reports to
the President through the Secretary of Defense. He oversees, directs and
coordinates all U.S. Government (USG) programs and activities in Iraq, except
those under the command of the Commander, U.S. Central Command (CENTCOM)...
The CPA is vested by the President with all executive, legislative and
judicial authority [i.e. governmental power] necessary to achieve its
objectives, exercised consistent with relevant U.N. Security Council
resolutions, including [U.N. Security Council] Resolution 1483,32 and the laws
and usages of war. The CPA Administrator has primary responsibility for
exercising this authority.

"The CPA is vested by the President with all executive, legislative, and
judicial authority..." sounds very much like the language of Britain's
colonial charters. But it subsitutes "vest" for "grant" (I'm not sure what
thelegal implication of that might be) and lacks anything like the very
redeeming feature of the American colonial charters that reserved rights to
their "English liberties" for the residents of the granted area -- one of the
main origins of the United States' Bill of Rights. Only the "laws and usages
of war" seem to have restricted the CPA under the charter language reported
here. This is more like the charter of the Royal Guinea Company that granted
said corporation martial law power so that the company would have a free hand
to defend its taking of slaves. To be fair, the United States was fighting a
war, and the CPA unlike the Guinea Company was temporary and not, as far as I
know, taking slaves.  
  
Under the principle of conservation of rights, the President could not grant
any more authority than he himself possessed under law. But that's an
interesting side issue.  
  
If indeed the Adminstrator of the CPA "reports to" the Secretary of Defense,
this suggests a principle-agent or employment relationship rather than a
property relationhip (the owner of one property does not "report to" another).
So that rules out a true private franchise (or, as Paul Krugman crudely and
naively puts it in today's New York Times, a "private fiefdom") as a theory.
Thus it wasn't as independent as the typical British colonial corporation.
That doesn't rule out some other kind of contracting relationship, however, or
just a DoD internal hierarchy, either of which could be at least as or more
corrupt than a so-called "fiefdom." There was never any such legal entity as a
"fiefdom," by the way -- the term is a figment of non-legal historians'
imaginations and of uncritical readers of history like Paul Krugman.  
  
Of course the Brits, still playing Empire, chimed in to say that they, too,
helped set up the CPA in this letter to the United Nations:  

> In order to meet these objectives and obligations [disarming Iraq and
providing for the humanitarian needs of Iraqis] in the post-conflict period in
Iraq, the United States, the United Kingdom and Coalition partners, acting
under existing command and control arrangements through the Commander of
Coalition Forces, have created the Coalition Provisional Authority, which
includes the Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance, to exercise
powers of government temporarily, and, as necessary, especially to provide
security, to allow the delivery of humanitarian aid, and to eliminate weapons
of mass destruction.

The CPA's status was also a matter of PR:  
  

> > Billing itself as an international coalition, while eschewing the label
“federal agency,” might be construed as an effort to make the organization
more palatable, at least symbolically, to Iraqis and others. For example, the
CPA website address ended “.com” and the PMO website ended “.net.” United
States government website addresses typically end “.gov.” Furthermore, the
Iraqi flag is the only flag that appeared on the two websites. No flags from
coalition countries were displayed.

Of course Congress' biggest concern of is  
  

> Further compounding the problem, oversight initiatives might have been met
with theresponse that the activity in question was carried out under an
authority over which the oversight body — Congress — had no jurisdiction.

Shades of Parliament declaring oversight authority over the American Colonies?
(That was the main legal issue of the American Revolution, I hope my U.S.
readers recall). It's better than the leading alternatives of unaccountable
Presidential authority or United Nations authority, I suppose. And unlike
Parliament's claim it is presumably like the CPA a temporary one.

The Congressional report concludes that "[t]he status of this organization
remains open to question." It suggests that the CPA has a "capacity as an
entity of the United State government" but that it also had "other roles."
That means that the CPA was able to operate with more flexibility and less
accountability: "[p]ossibly, the mix of arrangements allowed CPA to operate
with greater discretion and more authority, and have access to more resources,
than if it had been solely a federal agency, or an arm of the United Nations."  
  

> Available information about the authority found in materials produced by the
Administration alternatively (1) denies that it was a federal agency; (2)
states that it was a U.S. government entity or instrumentality; (3) suggests
that it was enacted under United Nations Security Council Resolution 1483; (4)
refers to it, and OHRA, as “civilian groups ... reporting to the Secretary [of
Defense]”;143 (5) states that it was created by the United States and United
Kingdom; and (6) asserts that it was established by the then-Commander of
CENTCOM. Without a clear, unambiguous statement that declares the CPA’s
organizational status, clarifies what its relationship was with DOD and other
federal agencies, and addresses the competing explanations for how it was
created, various questions are left unanswered, including whether, and to what
extent, CPA might be held accountable for its programs, activities, decisions,
and expenditures.

I couldn't agree more. But I'd add the following: bureaucratic hierarchy is
not the be-all and end-all of government, nor is Congressional oversight,
especially when the people being governed (here the Iraqis) are not voting for
said Congress. (No taxation without representation, remember?) Just as the
printing press era led to substantial reorganization and the rise of
bureacracy, so the era of Internet consciousness and asymmetric warfare may
lead to the rise of new, and the recreation of the best of old, alternatives
to a command-and-control bureaucracy for basic governmental functions.
Franchise government -- the colonial corporation and its subsets -- probably
has a valuable role to play if we insist on conducting "democracy building"
operations overseas. The crude recapiulation of this form (alas, sans most of
the legal protections that historically accompanied it) in the form of the CPA
and its contractors suggests that the franchise form is indeed re-emerging.  
  
Democracy spread to America, not in the form of a central government
bureacracy, and certainly not in the form of a military authority, but in the
form of colonial companies whose charters preserved for residents our "English
liberties." If we use franchises, however, we need to use them openly, and we
need to revive the limitations we imposed on them -- especially the ability of
victims of their abuses to sue in royal courts (for the U.S. that would be
federal courts), especially for violations of the kinds of procedural rights
now found in the U.S. Bill of Rights and the international Geneva Conventions
regarding war.  
  
Meanwhile, we should have no secret charters. How much freedom would we have
under the U.S. Constitution if it were secret? How well would our "English
liberties" have been preserved in the American colonies, and the institutions
of democracy developed, if our charters had been secret? How accountable would
such a government be? NPSD 24 should be declassified immediately, and no
secret charter should be considered to have any legal authority by any
government official or any other citizen any time in the future.  

