  
  
A nice illustration of the major flaw I have described in the Coase Theorem.
Much of what is valuable in the above link I actually wrote in the comments
and will now foreground with some minor edits:  

> A music store is next door to a doctor's office. The music store would
prefer (if the office of a rich doctor who wants quiet for his patients did
not exist next door) to let its customers test its electric guitars at volume
VM1 > 0. The doctor prefers it to be quieter (VD < VM1). Coase theory assumes
that the only possible choices are within the range {VM1, VD}, i.e. any volume
of electric guitar testing in between or including these two preferences. In
the absence of transaction costs and given only this range, one can indeed
conclude that the music store and the doctor will bargain to an efficient
outcome. But these aren't the only choices. The music store can, at additional
cost to itself C, turn up the volume nobs on its amplifiers and play the music
at volume VM2 > VM1. If the doctor is willing to pay the music store P1 to
change the volume from VM1 to VD, and P2 > P1 + C to turn the volume down from
VM2 to VD, the music store has an incentive to play the music at volume VM2
instead of VM1, or to threaten same, in order to extract for itself a greater
benefit from the situation.  
>  
> In other words, the same physical effect that produced the externality gives
rise to an opportunity and incentive to play a negative-sum game. Here it
changes the music store's prefered volume in the absence of a rich doctor next
door from VM1, to VM2 > VM1, due to the opportunity to extort extra payments
from the doctor by creating an even less bearable din, for which the doctor is
willing to pay even more to avoid. The music store is willing to incur an
extra cost C to itself in order to extract the greater payment P2 from the
doctor. For the overall game the payment P2 is a wash and C makes it negative-
sum. (In the music store example, cost C comes from the music store chasing
away some of its own customers, albeit at a slower rate than it chases away
the doctor's customers, by testing its guitars more noisly than it would
prefer in the absence of the doctor).  
>  
> If, as in reality, there are transaction costs causing bargains to sometimes
not be reached, the outcome is even worse, as noise VM2 is costlier, perhaps
far more costlier, to the doctor's practice than VM1: such outcomes are often
far worse outcome under transaction costs than the range of possible outcomes
that Coaseians contemplate.  
>  
> Of course, more generally in the absence of proper prior legal allocations
of rights the doctor and music store could threaten each other in other ways:
the doctor could threaten to poison the guitar frets, the music store could
call in the mob on the doctor, etc.  
>  
> (Furthermore, even with tort law preventing these other negative-sum games
the music store has an incentive to falsely "reveal" preference VM2 instead of
VM1 to the doctor and to the judge -- a common problem that good tort law
usually, but hardly with perfection, tackles).  
>  
> The example of the music store and its amplifier volume shows that the
externality itself contains potential or actual coercion -- the same physical
effect that causes the externality often makes negative-sum games possible,
and in the absence of any prior legal limits on the externality, opportunities
and incentives for coercive negative-sum games are inherent in the externality
-- so that analyses of such externalities with the Coase Theorem, which
assumes such games don't exist, will often lead to misleading or false
conclusions.  
>  
> The game being played here by the music store is negative-sum for the same
reason a tax is, firstly because the music store's coercion distorts the
behavior of the doctor and his patients. Assuming the doctor is helpless to
stop the noise without making the payoff (e.g. we artificially assume he can't
order a mob hit on the music store, or poison its customers, or emit any other
such "extreme" externality to avenge or deter the music store's excess
externality) he will go golfing more, and see fewer patients, if he is paying
P2 to the store instead of P1. Fewer patients will be healed, a net loss of
welfare. Since we assume the music store is rational, it will demand only the
Laffer-maximum amount of extortion, but Laffer-maximum taxes still have plenty
of distoritve effects that produce inefficiencies compared to the no-taxation
case. Secondly, the behavior of the music store is also distorted because it
has excess profits to spend. It will invest its extra money in opening new
music stores and concert halls next to other doctor's offices, nursing homes,
and similar because that is a lucrative source of profit, and so other
activities that would prefer quiet will be distorted in turn. It is often
unreasonable to assume that Coaseian payees are spending their extra money
efficiently. Interestingly, Gary Becker assumed the Coaseian payor's behavior
was not distorted and that the Coaseian payee was spending its extra profits
efficiently, and used this Coaseian reasoning to argue that governments
themselves are efficient outcomes of Coaseian bargaining. Becker's argument is
wrong for the same reason that [anarcho-capitalist David] Friedman's
[Coaseian] argument is wrong for legal protection agencies: it doesn't account
for the economic distortions caused by coercion.  
>  
> To see where these negative-sum games lead, let's take the case of roving
loudspeakers. Pickup trucks drive through the city, parking in front of every
business in turn and demanding large payments to take their noise elsewhere.
The optimal extortion for the extortors in this case is nearly 100% of all
business wealth in the city (again assuming the victims are defenseless),
because if extortor A doesn't extort any remaining wealth extortor B will be
happy to come in and take it. The economy is so distorted that practically
nothing gets produced or distributed and the city's economy collapses. This is
the "roving bandit" case studied by Mancur Olson. Where two stores are next to
each other and neither can move constitute "stationary bandits", as do gangs
or governments with "monopolies of coercion" over fixed territories. As the
roving loudspeakers case illustrates, rational stationary bandits collect a
far lower percent of their victims' profits in taxes than do roving bandits.
(But stationary bandits with the much lower rate than 100% end up collecting a
far higher absolute amount -- recall the Laffer curve) . If on the other hand
we assume the victims are not defenseless, we have negative-sum games like
hawk/dove, negative tit-for-tat, etc. which again are paradigmatically very
different from voluntary Coaseian bargains.  
>  
> We can measure the effectiveness of an excess (or coercive) externality for
extracting super-Coasiean payoffs by how great a harm the externality can
produce for the least cost to the emitter. The ubiquity of technology that is
very effective in producing the greatest harm for the least cost, i.e.
weapons, in our world should be a very good clue that our world is not
Coaseian. Music volume, spark emission, and so on beyond the "preferred" level
Coaseians falsely assume to be maximal are logically weapons. Their harm/cost
ratio is lower than guns, tanks, bombers, missiles, flamethrowers, herbicides,
and so on, but they have an advantage in being physically hard to distinguish
from merely Coaseian externalities, which would come in handy in a world where
judges and other lawmakers actually based law on the Coase theorem (the good
news is that they mostly don't).

