Clayton: _Every transaction is "coercive" by your definition. Is the seller
coercing the buyer to give him $1.15 for the soda the buyer wants to purchase
or is the buyer is coercing the seller to give away the soda he's selling for
$1.15?_  
  
Neither is coercion, and the distinction between this voluntary transaction
and a coercive transaction is quite clear, as is the distinction between their
economic consequences. A voluntary transaction like this one is generally a
positive-sum transaction: both parties gain. If either party did not stand to
gain from a voluntary transaction, it could simply decline the offer, with no
harmful consequences. Extortion OTOH is a negative-sum game: if one party
declines the transaction, harm to that party is inflicted, even at a cost to
the inflictor, resulting in a net loss of wealth. There's a clear distinction
between voluntary and coercive transactions, and between their expected
consequences for economic efficiency -- positive in the case of voluntary
transactions, and negative in the case of coercive transactions.  
  
This clarity, however, breaks down in the case of negative externalities --
there is no strong and simple separation to be made between a harmful
externality and coercion. Even if there was such a distinction, tort law or
similar would be required, logically and temporally prior to Coaseian
negotiation under contract law, to reify said distinction in order to render
said transaction voluntary and thus positive-sum. In reality tort and criminal
law have made a number of subtle and highly evolved distinctions (e.g. those
between purposeful, knowing, negligent, and innocently accidental behavior) to
tackle such problems.  
  
BTW, government as we know it is _not_ required for effective tort law, and I
reject the false distinctions people people brought up on the false
assumptions of modern political science usually make between government
(usually implying a modern regulatory government) and anarchy. There are a
wide variety of systems, for example systems of political property rights,
that are neither anarchy nor anything resembling modern regulatory
governments. So my proof that the Coase Theorem is false is in no way an
argument in favor of modern government -- it is simply an argument against
certain theoretical assumptions sometimes made in the law  & economics
movement and by anarcho-capitalism in particular.

