Addendum: globalism and the brain drain towards innovation at the high end of
Maslow's hierarchy (knowledge for its own sake, entertainment, socializing --
the stuff that dominates the Internet) and away from the lower levels
(agriculture, extraction, manufacturing) go together. There has been strong
disincentive to innovate, especially in automation, in the Maslovian mundane
industries when globalization and the last half century of BRICS population
growth has made accessible to the world economy so many more inexpensive
hands. So I'd attribute much of the brain drain from traditional engineering
to software engineering to, ironically, the lack of incentive to automate. In
particular to automate jobs dominated by physical motion, which can be done so
cheaply by all those new hands. Another part of the brain drain I'd attribute
to a simple subjective response young people have to the tremendous new value
being provided by the Internet in contrast to other industries, and to the
most dramatic entrepreneurial wealth accruing there, even though the median
wage for brain work in these higher reaches of Maslow's hierarchy is no better
and the risks are much higher. The result is similar to, albeit not as extreme
as, how young people overestimate the financial rewards and underestimate the
risks of acting and professional sports.  
  
BTW I quite disagree with Cowen when he says we need more "science." That is
academic inbreeding talking. In fact, the number of scientific papers has been
growing exponentially since 1973, during the entire period Cowen sees
innovation as having declined, and government funding of science has also
rapidly increased during this period. Mountains of papers where academicians
compete to show off and praise each other's IQs does not create innovation.
Indeed, it creates another brain drain from actually valuable innovation. The
problem with the non-IT/non-Internet portions of the economy has been these
brain drains from traditional engineering to other pursuits, and what is
needed to return to innovation is more people pursuing practical engineering
as well as semi-technical fields like plumbing, electricians, etc. The latter,
not people with advanced degrees, were the main sources of innovation during
the early and later (late 19th-early 20th century) industrial revolutions.
Science, real science that actually discovers useful stuff, is very important,
but only a relatively few geniuses in the hard sciences (physics and
chemistry) and the more difficult, but still tractable and economically
crucial ones (esp. biology) are needed to drive innovation where it is most
needed, further down in Maslow's hierarchy. The vast majority of innovation in
all parts of Maslow's hierarchy has and will come from engineers, computer
scientists, and practical technicians, as well as social innovations from
entrepreneurs, lawyers, etc. Even in theoretical physics we need far less pure
theory and far more people who start out thinking about practical technology,
like Einstein who started out reading patents.  
  
(to be continued)

