Anonymous, your concerns are well-placed, which as I take it are (1) resolving
disputes between different creditors with security interests in the car, and
(2) ensuring that the creditor does not abuse its power to remotely lock the
ignition.  
  
The biggest concern with the first problem is that this smart lien might be
used as a secret lien, i.e. a lien other creditors cannot readily discover by
searching the public financing statements, because the smart lien creditor can
rely on the technology rather than the law to take control of the car. So the
debtor might induce creditors to make further loans using the car as security
but not knowing of the first smart and secret lien.  
  
The general answer to the first concern is to align the protocols to secured
transaction law more than my original proposal or the real-world
implementations so far do. For example, instead of the conditional repo "keys"
being held by the creditor or his agent, they could be held by a neutral third
party that may also act as an arbitrator implementing the legal priority of
the creditors, and can act as an agent of a state court(in the U.S.) or
bankruptcy court for same. In this sense the protocol becomes a "smart
remedy", in particular a smart distraint, which can be implemented
automatically upon the verdict of the arbitrator or court. The first _publicly
registered_ lienholder (in the jargon of secured transaction law, the first
perfected creditor) holds the physical power of repossession, but the
arbitrator or court also holds the power to reverse this and give control to
another creditor if the law should so imply.  
  
To assist in this, the current system of public financing statements (that
record the security interests of various creditors, so that other creditors
are put on notice of these conditional rights) might be supplemented or
replaced with a secure distributed database of security interests, implemented
in the same way as secure property titles. When the control transfer
conditions occurs (e.g. missing too many payments), the smart lien could
automatically look at the database to determine the proper creditor to which
to give control. Alternatively, it might be possible to automate the lookup
and interpretation of current state financing statement databases to the same
effect.  
  
The answer to your second concern is not Mutual Assured Destruction (giving
debtors the password to their creditors' bank account), but assuring that the
_condition itself_ is secure -- in other words, that the creditor physically
cannot take control of the car unless the debtor really has not paid, and has
loses all possibility of controlling the car in any way after said debtor has
paid in full.  
  
In this sense my original proposal solves (or at least plans to solve) this
second problem, but the real-world implementations so far don't, and do indeed
put more power than is ideal into the hands of creditors. Of course, debtors
are free to decline to buy cars on credit using these mechanisms, but a fairer
protocol, i.e. one in which the conditional logic is secure from both creditor
and debtor, would be even better: more people would be willing to buy the
cars, expanding credit opportunities.

