The classic economic account of the origins of money is that of Carl Menger.
Menger described money as emerging out of markets where commodoties were
bartered. Barter markets were inefficient, Menger explained, because a double
coincidence of wants was required before a trade could be consumated. One way
to solve this would be credit, but credit is a very imperfect institution for
a variety of reasons. Another way to solve the problem is the intermediate
commodity -- a commodity that everybody is willing to take or give in trade.
This would start by being an otherwise useful commodity, but eventually it
would be come to be valued more, or even entirely, for its monetary attributes
(i.e. its attributes as an intermediate commodity, such as durability,
divisability, the ability to be securely stored, etc.) Thus would money
naturally emerge from the operations of a barter market.  
  
Menger's theory is valuable in a number of ways. The coincidence of wants
problem is a crucial idea as well as illustrating the Austrian economic ideas
of time and subjective preferences. Menger's theory provides a good example of
how economic institutions can emerge, it demonstrates that (contrary to modern
legal definitions) money need not be created by any sort of government, and it
suggests that the emergence of money long predated the invention of coinage.
And Menger's theory is true insofar as a barter market would evolve in the way
Menger describes. However, as an actual description of the origins of money it
is almost surely wrong -- or alternatively, it is even more right than he
could have known. This is because money, in the form of collectibles such as
shells, predated low transaction cost commodity markets by tens of thousands
of years.  
  
Money (or, if you prefer to stick to modern legal definitions of money, proto-
money which I call "collectibles") emerged far sooner than barter markets
because the double coincidence of wants problem occurs not only in barter
exchanges, but in other transactions that were as or more important than
barter to hunter-gatherer societies: paying tribute, paying legal fines, bride
price, and mortuary distribution (inheritance). Furthermore, barter exchanges
in these societies usually resembled far more a bilateral monopoly than an
efficient market exchange. Use of shell jewelry or similar objects in hunter-
gatherer and neolithic societies for these purposes is nearly universal.
Nevertheless, in all these kinds of transactions a double (or more)
coincidence of wants and events (such as death, marriage, or legal judgment)
is required if they are done in-kind rather than with objects with good
monetary properties; the best such objects available were usually shells,
often strung on necklaces providing secure storage and divisibility.  
  
Furthermore, these appeared long enough ago (mature shell jewelry is found now
back to 75,000 B.P.) that the (begging) explanation "people collected shells
and made jewelry for pleasure" may be backwards -- humans may well have
evolved the pleasure of collection because of the evolutionary benefits of
greater cooperation. Lowered transaction costs for all these kinds of
transactions meant greater familial, political, legal, and economic
cooperation -- i.e. the enhancement of kin altruism as well as reciprocal
altruism and the mitigation of aggression.  
  
This is spelled out in detail in my Shelling Out: The Origins of Money

