a: There are certainly a few examples of beneficial government crash programs
one might choose (out of the far greater number of duds and wrong directions),
but I'm not sure you've selected them. And I'm not at all convinced that we
have learned how to distinguish the successes from the duds ahead of time.  
  
The interstate system subordinated the natural evolution of transporation
economics to military needs. It has been a big cause of urban sprawl, the
replacement of energy-efficient rail transport with wasteful trucks, and
generally the creation of car-dependent culture that now makes solutions to
global warming so difficult and potentially so devastating.  
  
The nuclear bomb might be a better example, except for it being, even more
than global warming until quite recently (and arguably even now) the most
important threat to the environment and civilization. Instead of so much fear
about Germany getting the bomb (they had chased out most of their good
physicists and they never got very close), far better would have been to use
the winning of World War II (quite obvious by the time of the Almagadoro test,
much less by the time of Hiroshima and Nagasaki) to negotiate a universal
nuclear arms ban while all nations were still in the same position of not
having the bomb. This would have been far easier to enforce than the mostly
successful chemical arms ban. It's a pipe dream now but it would have been
practical during the short window after WWII. This is actually a classical
Tabarokian irreversible decision that we made with too little information --
in this case too little information about and too much emphasis on the
immediate threat of Germany instead of on the long-term problems caused by a
world full of nuclear bombs. Now we are stuck with increasing proliferation
and the spectre of terrorist threats emanating from the nuclear arms races
that have spread across the planet since the Manhattan Project. Not to mention
that nation-states are still at this very moment aiming thousands of nuclear
weapons at each other, in casse you think that threat disappeared with the end
of the Cold War.  
  
Furthermore, comparing Manhattan Project to global warming solutions is apples
to oranges. The nuclear bomb project itself was merely a matter of physics --
the scientists didn't usefully (and couldn't have usefully) worry about the
political or economic consequences of it. The main problem with global warming
is not the physics of it (even though its science, both in terms of problems
and solutions, is more uncertain and far more complex than the problem of
nuclear explosions was in 1941), it's the social problem of convincing over a
billion carbon dioxide polluters to knock it off. Nobody's done anything like
that in human history. In some respects the U.S. acid rain market came close,
but that was mostly a domestic issue and the polluters were almost entirely
large-source.  
  
The last century was full of well-intended large scale political experiments
devastating economies and environments and even genociding people. There are
far more ways to devastate the economy (and thus also devastate the
environment) by a panicked political reaction to global warming than the few
(and probably not, so far, well characterized) number of ways to successfully
reduce greenhouse gases without substantial harm to the economy. We'd better
be quite sure that we have one of the correct ways before we proceed with
large-scale political and economic experiments.  
  
BTW, the "huge" economic benefits will only accrue to the technological
leaders if they are actually leading down what turns out to be the proper
path. But governments more usually lead down the wrong path. It's by small-
scale experiments with a wide variety of different paths, like the start-ups
in Silicon Valley, that society discovers what the good paths actually are.  
  
On scary positive feedback scenarios: almost all of these are the kind of wild
speculations, unfalsifiable or supported by slim evidence, that Tabarrok warns
us to heed at our peril. They are the very kind of uncertainty which are
probably extreme error and for which the cost of a solution is far too high:
these are the best circumstances in which to heed Tabarrok's adice to ignore
the hysterical noise, wait, experiment, observe, and learn, and only make
expensive investments when we actually know quite well what we are doing, in
terms of the _solutions_ as well as in terms of the problems.  
  
BTW, lest you think I'm being dogmatic here, let me present a scenario in
which it _would_ make sense for government(s) to act on a large scale and
quickly: we detect an asteroid that will, with high probability, strike earth
and cause many deaths, environmental damage, and hundreds of billions of
dollars of damage. In such a scenario the information we have is clear.
Orbital mechanics is a vastly simpler science than climatology. The
uncertainties themselves, in terms of statistical error bars and how those
error bars can be reduced with more observations, are far better understood.
Thus the probability of the threat is very well understood, the costs
reasonably well understood, and the solution reasonably well understood (like
Apollo, it's a physically very simple problem that mostly just requires
scaling up well characterized simple systems). Thus even though it could be
very expensive, and might depend on our warning lead time be extremely urgent,
as long as the expected damage reduction outweighs the expected cost it makes
sense to act as quickly as is necessary. In such cases where there is good
reason to be confident in one's numbers there is good reason to be confident
in the expected cost/benefit calculations. This is so far nowhere near the
case in global warming, especially when considering the political and economic
risks of destabilizing our transportation and energy infrastructures and of
setting up powerful new political bureaucracies. We have much learning to do,
and many low-cost experiments to try and observe, before we can properly
tackle global warming in a large-scale political way.

