Alex Tabarrok writes another of his excellent (but far too infrequent) posts,
this time about the problem of global warming and the relative merits of delay
versus immediate action:  
  

> Suppose...that we are uncertain about which environment we are in but the
_uncertainty will resolve over time_. In this case, there is a strong argument
for delay. The argument comes from option pricing theory applied to real
options. A potential decision is like an option, making the decision is like
exercising the option. Uncertainty raises the value of any option which means
that the more uncertainty the more we should hold on to the option, i.e. not
exercise or delay our decision.

I agree wholeheartedly, except to stress that the typical problem is not the
binary problem of full delay vs. immediate full action, but one of _how much_
and what sorts of things to do in this decade versus future decades. In that
sense, for global warming it seems to me none too early to set up political
agreements and markets we will need to incentivize greenhouse gas reductions.
Not to immediately and radically cut down emissions of greenhouse gases -- far
from it -- but to learn about, experiment with, and debug the institutions we
will need to reduce greenhouse emissions without creating even greater
political and economic threats. Once these are debugged, but not until then,
cutting greenhouse emissions will have a far lower cost than if we panic and
soon start naively building large international bureaucracies.  
  
We already know how to use markets to reduce pollution with minimal cost to
industry (and minimal economic impact generally). We now need to learn how to
apply these lessons on and international level while avoiding the very real
threat of the corruption and catastrophic decay of essential industries that
comes from establishing new governmental institutions to radically alter their
behavior.  
  
There are tons of theories about politics and economics, practically all of
them highly oversimplified nonsense. No single person knows more than a
miniscule fraction of the knowledge needed to solve global warming. Political
debate over technological solutions will get us nowhere. We won't learn much
more about creating incentives to reduce greenhouse gases except by creating
them and seeing how they work. As with any social experiment, we should start
small and with what we already know works well in analogous contexts -- i.e.
what we already know about getting the biggest pollution reductions at the
smallest costs.  
  
The costs of the markets -- especially the target auction (and expected
exchange) prices of carbon dioxide pollution units -- should thus start out
small. In that sense, the European approach under the Kyoto Protocol (the
European Union Emission Trading Scheme ) provides a good model even though it
has been criticized for costing industry almost nothing so far, and
correspondingly producing little carbon dioxide reduction so far. So what? We
have to learn to crawl before we can learn to walk. The goal, certain fanatic
"greens" notwithstanding, is to figure out how to reduce carbon dioxide
emissions, not to punish industry or return to pre-industrial economies. Once
people and organizations get used to a simple set of incentives, they can be
tightened in the future in response to the actual course of global warming, in
response to what we learn about global warming, and above all in what we learn
from our responses to global warming.  
  
We already know markets -- and perhaps also carefully designed carbon taxes,
but as opposed to micro-regulation and getting the law involved in choosing
particular technological solutions -- markets can radically reduce specific
pollutants if they specific mitigation decisions are left to market
participants rather than dictated by government. And we might learn certain
mitigation strategies (perhaps this one, for example) that turn out to be
superior to radical carbon dioxide reductions.  
  
  
Let's set up and debug the basics now -- and nothing is more basic to this
problem than international forums, agreements, and exchange(s) that include
_all_ countries that will be major sources of greenhouse gases over the next
century. These institutions must be designed (and this won't be easy!) for
minimal transaction costs -- in particular for minimal rent-seeking and
minimal corruption. Until we've set up and debugged such a system, it could be
far more catastrophic than the projected changes in the weather to impose
large costs and create large bureacracies funded by premature "solutions" to
the global warming problem.  
  
As the accompanying illustrations show, a domestic United States programming
that left all decisions beyond the most basic and general of market rules to
the market participants -- and thus left the specific decisions to those with
the most knowledge, here the electric utility companies, and minimized the
threat of the rise of a corrupt bureaucracy -- was able to radically reduce
sulfur dioxide and nitrous oxides (acid rain causing) pollution. So much so
that few remember that acid rain in the 1970s and 80s was a scare almost as
big global warming is today. Scientists plausibly argued that our forests were
in imminent danger of demise. By experimenting with, learning about, and then
exploiting the right institutions, that major pollution threat was, after
methodically working through the initial learning curve, rapidly mitigated.  
  
Global warming is an even bigger challenge than acid rain -- especially its
international nature which demands the participation of all major countries --
but we now have the acid rain experience and others to learn from. We don't
have to start from scratch and we don't need to implement a crash program. We
can start with what worked quite well in the similar case of acid rain and
experiment until we have figured out in reality -- not merely in shallow
political rhetoric -- what will work well for the mitigation of global
warming.  
  
Furthermore, it probably will pay to not impose the big costs until we've
learned far more about the scientific nature of the problems (note the plural)
and benefits (yes, there are also benefits, and also plural) of the major
greenhouse gases, and until the various industries have learned how to
efficiently address the wide variety and vast number of unique problems for
industry that the general task of reducing carbon dioxide output raises. It's
important to note, however, that the scientific uncertainty, while still
substantial, is nevertheless far smaller than the uncertainties of political
and economic institutions and their costs.  
  
To put it succinctly -- we should not impose costs faster than industry can
adapt to them, and we should not develop international institutions faster
than we can debug them: otherwise the "solutions" could be far worse than the
disease.  
  
  
Another application of Tabarrok's theory: "the" space program. (Just the fact
that people use "the" to refer to what are, or at least should be, a wide
variety of efforts, as in almost any other general area of human endeavor,
should give us the first big hint that something is very wrong with "it"). For
global warming we may be letting our fears outstrip reality; in "the" space
program we have let our hopes outstrip reality. Much of what NASA has done
over its nearly fifty year history, for example, would have been far more
effective and self-sustaining if done several decades later, in a very
different way, on a smaller scale, on a much lower budget, and for practical
reasons, such as commercial or military reasons, rather than as ephemeral
political fancies. The best space development strategy is often to just to
wait and learn -- wait until we've developed better technology and wait until
we've learned more about what's available up there. Our children will be able
to do it far more effectively than we. I understand that such waiting is
excrutiatingly painful to die-hard space fans like myself, but all the more
reason to beware of deluding ourselves into acting too soon.  
  
In both the global warming and space program activist camps you hear a lot of
rot about how "all we need" is "the political will." Utter nonsense. Mostly
what we need to do is wait and experiment and learn. When the time is ripe the
will is straightforward.  
  
_A million-yuan giraffe, brought back to China from East Africa by a Zheng He
flotilla in 1414 (click to enlarge). Like NASA's billion-dollar moon rocks,
these were not the most cost-efficient scientific acquisitions, but the
Emperor's ships (and NASA's rockets) were bigger and grander than anybody
else's! In the same year as the entry of this giraffe into China, on the other
side of the planet, the Portuguese using a far humbler but more practical
fleet took the strategic choke-point of Ceuta from the Muslims.Who would you
guess conquered the world's sea trade routes soon thereafter -- tiny Portugal
with their tiny ships and practical goals, or vast China with their vast ocean
liners engaging in endeavours of glory?_

