Modern civics and political science is often taught as an absurd dichotomy:
that government is a "monopoly over the use of force" and that the absence of
government is anarchy. Using this fallacious dialectic, many highly lawful
societies, such as most of medieval Europe, and in particular medieval and
renaissance England, were "anarchies." Even the United States is really an
"anarchy": jurisdictions are divided up among federal, state, county,
municipal and other entities, including shopping malls and mass transit
authorities whose security guards can legally arrest probable criminals. (Some
states even still allow "citizen arrest," although it's not recommended that
people who don't understand the procedural distinctions between arrest and
kidnapping try it). Government does not, and should not, come in the abstract
forms taught by high school civics and political science, nor as in the
economic models of law that talk about law being enforced by "the government."  
  
In medieval and renaissance England (and in many later instances), English
jurisdictions were property. The king had granted (as property called a
"franchise") much jurisdiction to lords and corporate bodies (such as Church
organizations, municipalities, and colonies) but owned the residual
jurisdiction of the realm (i.e., all jurisdiction not owned by somebody else).
This grant would take the form of a property deed called a charter. A
franchise could also be owned by prescription -- i.e. by having exercised the
jurisdiction since the English "time out of mind" year for prescriptive
property rights, 1189 A.D.  
  
Where franchise courts had exclusive jurisdiction, the king's courts were
merely "night watchmen" courts that insured that the franchise courts stayed
within their property boundaries, i.e. their jurisdictional and procedural
bounds. Medieval and early colonial English courts thus formed more of a
"peer-to-peer" system than the hierarchical current (Roman imperial style, or
"sovereign") system where "higher courts" generally review both the procedure
and substance of judgments in "lower courts."  
  
Franchise jurisdictions were defined, by custom or statute or express charter
language, by the people and legal subjects over which jurisdiction could be
exercised. For example, a merchant court could exercise jurisdiction over
merchants doing business at the market fair the court was appurtenant to, and
the law it exercised was merchant law. This only had to be consistent with
royal law in keeping within its jurisdiction (procedurally as well as
territorially): substantively such laws could and often did diverge sharply
from royal substantive law.  
  
There were dozens of standard jurisdictional franchises. For example,
"infangthief" enabled the franchise owner to hang any thief caught red-handed
in the franchise territory, whereas "outfangthief" enabled the owner to chase
the thief down outside the franchise territory, catch him red-handed, and then
hang him. "Gallows" enabled the owner to try and punish any capital crime, and
there were a variety of jurisdictions correponding to several classes of
lesser offenses. "View of frankpledge" allowed the owner to control a local
militia to enforce the law. "The sheriff's pleas" allowed the owner to hear
any case that would normally be heard in a county court. There were also
franchises that allowed the collection of various tolls and taxes.  
  
A corporation was also a franchise, and corporations often held, as
appurtenances, jurisdictional franchises. The City of London was and is a
corporate franchise. In the Counties Palatine the entire government was
privately held, and most of the American Colonies were corporate franchises
that held practically all jurisdiction in their territory, sometimes subject
to reservations (such as the common law rights of English subjects and the
right of the king to collect customs reserved in the American charters). The
colonies could in turn grant franchises to local lords (as with the Courts
Baron and Courts Leet in early Maryland) and municipalities. American
constitutions are largely descended from such charters.  
  
In terms of protecting personal liberties, franchises in general and colonial
corporations in particular ranged all over the map. Those where Englishmen
themselves settled in large numbers, such as the American colonies, tended to
be protective and even expansive of liberties, but many other English colonial
corporations, from the East India Company (first chartered in the late 16th
century) to the Royal South Africa Company (Cecil Rhodes' colonial
corporation, chartered in the late 19th century) could be authoritarian and
brutal especially to non-Englishmen.  
  
Through medieval and renaissance times, and to some extent well into the
colonial period, the basic laws of English jurisdiction were property laws.
The basic actions (kinds of lawsuit) contesting the jurisdiction or procedure
of a court were those of title and trespass. Infringement of jurisdiction was
a trespass, and abuse of a defendant by a court (i.e. violating certain common
procedural laws) could be a trespass. If any person, including a royal or
franchise official, confiscated a person's goods, or imprisoned an individual,
or administered some other coercive remedy, he could be sued for trespass. He
then had to defend his use of force as a matter of legal authority -- that he
had rights as a victim seeking remedy, or rights by owning a jurisdictional
franchise, and that he exercised those rights within the personal,
substantive, and procedural bounds of the jurisdiction.  
  
The king's courts could only reach inside exclusive franchise jurisdictions
through the "extraordinary" or "prerogative" writs, which were writs of
trespass or title. Thus, where franchise courts held the substantive
jurisdiction, the king's courts generally could not review their proceedings
for substantive error: only for trespassing on jurisdiction and committing
certain procedural defaults, such as depriving a defendant of a right to jury
trial. Indeed, many of the procedural rights specified in today's United
States Constitution probably have their origins in the legal authority defense
required of both franchise and royal courts to exercise coercive process
without trespassing on the defendant.  
  
David Friedman has described the legal system of medieval Iceland. This was
also a peer-to-peer justice system, albeit less specialized and in some ways
even more decentralized, and where personal jurisdiction was tied more to
choice than to territory. In political science terms medieval Iceland has been
called an "anarchy," but it is more realistic to describe it as a very peer-
to-peer kind of government, where medieval England was partly peer-to-peer and
partly hierarchical, and modern governments tend, on the imperial Roman model,
to be quite hierarchical.  
  
The Icelandic system was also based on a jurisdictional property, the
_godord._ However, the _godord_ was more a protection service, champion, legal
advocate, and executor of the law than a judge. The court of last resort,
since Iceland had no king, was the democratic _allthing,_ but it was more than
a night-watchman court as it reviewed substance as well as procedure of
dispute settlements arbitrated between _godord._  
  
In our modern system of arbitration, based on choice-of-forum clauses in
contracts, personal jurisdiction is based even more on choice, but it is
embedded within our imperial Roman style hierarchical and territorial court
system that reviews arbitrations for substance as well as procedure, and
arbitrators depend on normal governmental entities to execute their judgments:
they have no police powers of their own.  
  
At the same time as the American Revolution eliminated most titles, it (on top
of the early Parliamentarian revolutions) eliminated most franchises, except
for certain rigid forms such as municipal corporations which are no longer
considered an instance of a franchise. Corporate colonies and Counties
Palatine were converted into States. (Actually this process started well
before the American Revolution, which was more of a climax to this process).
The modern laws of interstate jurisdiction came to be derived largely from
international law rather than from franchise property law, and the procedural
rights of defendants were encoded in constitutions which succeeded the
colonial charters. Today the word "franchise" is typically reserved to
official monopolies such as water utilities and jurisdictional and police
powers are defined by statute not property grant. The laws of procedure are
now based on constitutions and statutes, and the laws of jurisdiction are
generally derived from international law (treating for this purpose States as
sovereign states) rather than the old franchise law. However, some of the
extraordinary writs, such as _habeus corpus,_ survive in the ability of the
U.S. Supreme Court to reach into non-Article III courts (e.g. state courts,
military courts, etc.) to review their proceedings, usually still on
jurisdictional and procedural grounds.  
  

I will have much more to say about the "peer-to-peer plus nightwatchmen" model
of "government," and the extraordinary writs, in future post(s). I have also
describe the actual English system in much more detail, in a paper to be
forthcoming.

