Indeed, I'd go so far as to say that revenge is the origin and basis of
justice. Crusoe taking revenge because he believes Dalrymple has breached
their implicit or express understandings about rights and duties -- and vice
versa -- rather than invoking a "wise giant" or "the state" is the proper
starting point for the analysis of justice.  
  
Of course, you like me have probably been trained since kindergarten to stand
aghast at such statements -- how dare I suggest that "taking the law into your
own hands" is a more original and general form of justice than trusting your
parents, your teachers, or "the state" to mete out justice? It goes against
everything these authorities have drilled into our heads. All our lives we
have been trained to reflexively believe that revenge is criminal and to defer
it (in the rarified form of "justice") to some higher authority. To take the
law into your own hands is considered by believers in "the state" to be always
itself a criminal act.  
  
And indeed, I do not deny that such authorities (which are in fact far more
multifarious than "the state") are often more efficacious than revenge. But
more importantly, it is a world in which there were no standards regarding
rights and duties, and the associated remedies, that would be a very awful
place. But in fact in our real legal system, which has to at least some extent
defer to reality, there are many situations where taking the law into your own
hands is perfectly legal and proper. There are many more situations where it
is proper and it would be quite useful to make it legal -- but we don't
because most legislators and judges like practically all moderns reflexively
believe in and worship "the state". Even most libertarians reflexively believe
in "the state", and tilt at it like a vast windmill. What should rather be
attacked is the ideology that constructs and assumes this great fiction --
include libertarians who fulminate at "the state", and consider that if it
magically disappeared the world would be a utopia. But in fact it already does
not exist, and never existed, and the world is not and never has been a
utopia.  
  
More basically and relevant to this thread, for accurate analysis of political
and legal systems, it is "taking the law into your own hands", and not the
Romanist and now dominant mythology of "the state", that is the rational
starting point.  
  
Given this far more accurate starting point, it is far easier to see the
various alternatives -- political property rights, choice of law and choice of
forum being supreme among these -- to the Romanist mythology of "the"
monolithic state.

