Great post, thanks! Alas, I won't have time to read your paper or respond to
this in detail until August, but I've studied the history of the prerogative
writs in medieval and Renaissance England, so I will make some observations
much more informed by that than by what you have written.  
  
The origin of these writs is that they were property-based writs -- writs of
trespass (e.g. prohibitio) and writs of right (e.g. quo warranto) for
political property (esp. for the rights to hold franchises such as private
courts and enforcement powers).  
  
You write: "contrary to current doctrine, these are not creatures of statute
but fundamental rights that may not be constitutionally burdened"  
  
This will require an interesting argument, since in England and up to 1776 in
the U.S. the prerogative writs were generally seen as the king's writs, and it
is often assumed that some entity (variously argued to be the States or the
federal government) inherited such prerogatives of the king if anybody did.  
  
But instead of just being the king's writs we can look on them as writs
anybody who grants political property. Thus, for example, it would have been
logically possible for the holder of a county palatine to issue analogs of
these writs to their own franchisees (I didn't come across such a case, but
then again I didn't search the records of the counties palatine).  
  
One might make a Wilsonian argument that "we the people", not any government
entity, inherited these rights in the U.S. But it might cause great practical
problems to change from the grantor being able to bring a political writ of
right (quo warranto) to any citizen being able to do so. Also there were ways
to plead for the king to issue e.g. a prohibitio, and it was all actually done
by the courts, so one could argue that the court itself is the only state
entity that needs to be involved. (besides the official being challenged by
quo warranto). I wonder if there are any real cases along these lines, perhaps
from the Revolutionary War era. It does sound like a very good idea in theory,
to be sure, but it may be one of those grand experiments we want to try on a
small scale first.

