MM, you may have misunderstood what I meant by compression. All deductive
systems, whether those of Euclid or Mises, have a very small Kolmogorov
complexity -- it's just the complexity of their axioms. If you don't
understand this go read up on Kolmogorov complexity. It is the existence of
far greater complexity in the real world that negates the ability of simple
logic to describe the intersubjective world (economics, politics, etc.) The
complex world cannot be compressed with negligible lossiness into any simple
axiomatic system.  
  
The use of axiomatic deduction to create "theories of everything", outside
physics, is a pernicious species of totalitarian thought that has led and will
lead to totalitarian politics. The entire complex world is compressed into a
hypersimplistic system and most of one's ability to know the social world is
lost as a result. Far worse still when it such thought systems are forced on
others. Hegelians, Marxists, and many other mental pathologies have gone down
this route, and now we may have the modern abuse of praxeology to add on.  
  
The development of medieval and modern republican governments out of the
corporate form is no mere matter of "cargo cult" or the like. Medieval city-
states and boroughs were usually legal corporations that used the corporate
law of the time as their default law. And there were many intermediate forms
between the purely commercial and the purely governmental.  
  
You persist in the modern habit of putting "government" in one box and
"private" in a completely separate box, but in the Middle Ages and Renaissance
there were all sorts of real intermediate forms. They were heavily borrowing
real law and corporate controls from each other, not mere distant imitations.  
  
As for Montisquean separation of powers, they worked quite well until the 20th
century, and during the 20th century they worked far better than their main
alternative, communism. I agree that by themselves they are not the solution.
That is why I have added jurisdictional unbundling and legal choice. But I
hardly agree with your extreme notion of tossing every single hiotorically
valuable mechanism to control power out the window in favor of some vague
notion tht "the market" will solve all problems of involuntary power. Really,
I have not heard anything so naive since the idea that "the dictatorship of
the proletariat" will lead to "the withering of the state," and I'm getting
quite impatient with you persisting with such utter silliness.

