MM: "The essential problem with Chevron is that the doctrine of nondelegation
has been long since trashed."  
  
As it happens I also wrote a paper on the nondelegation doctrine. (There are
also some good descriptions of the Whig separation-of-powers ideas and schemes
in there). Modern enabling statutes (setting up new agencies) bear striking
resemblance to broad grants of political property -- practically franchises
but with few of the controls and formality that would come from making them
property rights. In theory this is not political property and the Congress
could disband an agency, but this is rare. Reorganizations like the Homeland
Security Department are slightly more common. (If they were really property
rights reorganizations would be probably be far more common, as it is with
public stock companies).  
  
MM: " The Webster-Clay-Lincoln theory that "the Union is older than the
States" is laughable."  
  
Perhaps, but the Continental Congress certainly existed before there were any
States. Both the States and the United States were created at the same time.
The American colonies certainly were not sovereign -- see their charters.
Declaring them sovereign is a crime against political property rights. And
federal courts (albeit admittedly not federal power generally) has been a
great source of libertarian constraint on the States, up to and including the
many advances in criminal procedure made by the Warren Court.  
  
Anyway, in a world where it takes five hours to get from one end of the U.S.
to another, and one can communicate anywhere on the globe instantly, the idea
of bundling law with territory is starting to look quite primitive. Do you
really want the Internet packets you send off every day all over the globe to
make you subject to thousands of different laws and political systems? The
future lies in unbundling territory from the law and in increasing
specialization in law and politics. Bermuda (insurance law) and Delaware
(corporate law) are great examples of legal competition to follow. If we can
do it right, we can radically increase the good kinds of legal competition --
ex ante choice of forum and choice of law -- without thousands of little city-
states, asteroid colonies, Mancur Olson's roving bandits, or Patri Friedman's
boats. A good exercise is to start with Internet law: can we and the computer
operator on the other end agree on a single law to govern our packets?  
  
AS: "If I could time-travel to the Convention I'd urge no Federal judiciary:
let any case of Federal jurisdiction be tried in any State; each side gets one
appeal to another State of their choice, and if two courts agree their
decision is final (adapting an idea of Murray Rothbard)."  
  
This is an interesting idea, but how is the second State chosen, and what if
they disagree, do we choose a third State? Take the majority of two out of
three as final? And are there any actual historical examples of this we could
study?

