Mencius,  
  
"Reasonable" is basically just legal-speak for "let the jury decide the
issue."  
  
Having a jury cap the fees or taxes charged by a franchise comes straight from
real monarcho-franchise law. It's a similar idea as requiring tax and budget
legislation to come from Commons or Congress, except repackaged -- each
different administrative function has its own "Congress." Two things prevent a
jury from extorting rule-making power in exchange for greater fees (this is
how Parliament achieved its overweaning power) -- (1) it is temporary and
chosen by lottery, so this year's jurors have no incentive to empower next
year's jurors, and (2) even if they tried, the scope of rule-making they can
influence is limited by the property deed of their particular franchise.  
  
There is a different fee structure and jury for franchise, and each franchise
corresponds to a small subsection of one of today's administrative agencies --
one for auto tailpipe emissions, another for smokestacks, etc.  
  
Actually the overall structure is rather Montesiquean: Board (legislative),
Extraordinary Court (judicial), and the executive dispersed among the
franchises. I've strengthened the ultimate authority of the judicial branch in
severe disputes, but I argue that due to the much narrowed jurisdiction of the
Court and the dispersed nature of the executive, they are still in fair
balance with my weakened legislative branch (which may only draft the property
deeds for new franchises, which is actually not all that different from what
Congress does today when it sets up an administrative agency -- but I've
severely seperated legislative power from the tax power).  
  
I suspect the "Byzantine agreement" work in computer science can be used to
prove that no possible form of government or any other configuration of police
powers can be made immune from your adaptive misconceptions problem. And Godel
probably showed that you can't set things up to make all substantial
misconceptions locally maladaptive. But I'd love to be proven wrong.  
  
Daniel,  
  
(1) Fee or tax collection is handled in the same way as collection of any
other debt -- there is no tax collection agency, witholding is voluntary just
as with today's "autopay" options from your checking account, and if you don't
pay on time it goes on your credit record and you could be sued. There will
probably be commercial aggregators to prevent citizens from receiving hundreds
bills from the hundreds of franchises.  
  
Choosing by lottery makes it too hard for supporters to bribe politicians
before they're elected, as often occurs in modern governments. Athens had a
similar system for electing public officials, and Venice had an ingenious
system of phased vote-lottery-vote-lottery-etc. system that resembled the
confusion/diffusion phases of a cipher. The result was to combine majority
rule with the bribe-reducing unpredictability of a lottery election.  
  
Another aspect is that juries only set fees -- the franchises make the actual
regulations within the scope of their deeds. So bribing juries is not the
route to effect regulations, although bribing franchises might be. If juries
set the fees high enough and the Board drafts the franchise deed carefully, I
am hopeful franchises can be disincentivized from taking bribes. Also a
crucial part of every deed -- we can make this an Article -- is that franchise
and their employees may take their revenue from jury-approved fees and in no
other way. Their bank accounts are closely monitored.  
  
(2) There must be default jurisdictions for the same reason there is a
background to every contract of default rules and a state of property. We
can't expect everybody to necessarily contract with everybody else (even
indirectly, i.e. a clause "We choose the same forum and law as the other
cuustomers of X") and contracts are often sadly incomplete (Godel strikes
again). So there have to be default terms and that includes default
jurisdictions. If it turns out that the franchises oppress their default
subjects and it becomes easy to switch via indirect choice clauses, AC might
well emerge. (If most people have switched out juries will tend to defund the
franchises). It's hard to imagine crafting mass agreements for large
minorities to opt out certain rules, such as global pollution rules, but it
would be fascinating exercise to figure out how to draft such contracts (a
hard task that most AC proponents sweep under the rug). There's not much AFAIK
in the Articles to discourage such an AC outcome if it is viable, but the
franchise system is at least necessary as a transition and as a fallback in
areas where AC doesn't work, for example (I suspect) global pollution like
carbon dioxide.  
  
(3) I'll have to punt -- I haven't thought much about how to start out on
Mencius' island. To the extent I think of transitions it is from actual
systems -- constitutional amendments and the like.

