Laches is the common-law name for the concept more commonly known as "the
statute of limitations."[*] The idea is that, if a wrong has been done, or
there is otherwise a dispute, we put a limit on the time within which the
victim or the victim's estate can file charges or sue for damages. Laches or
statutes of limitations apply to practically all kinds of wrongs of any
nature. There are three strong reasons for setting time limits on redressing
wrongs:  
  
(1) Memories fade, witnesses die, and evidence is degraded or destroyed,
rendering the rights and wrongs of the case increasingly uncertain and
susceptible to biased propaganda.  
  
(2) Security, confidence in, and stability of legal rights are crucial to a
civilized legal system. But if we go back far enough, the "chain of title" for
almost every legal right we have (including our political as well as economic
rights) can be plausibly argued to be illegitimate due to some kind of
unredressed wrong: some commission of force or fraud that was never remedied.
Without a time limit, hardly any legal right of almost any kind could be held
with legal security.  
  
(3) Having the estate of one person be responsible to the estate of another
person for a wrong committed by the ancestor of one to the ancestor of the
other gets us too far away from the individual responsibility and the shaping
of behavior through incentives that is at the core of law.  
  
Laches should also be a core political principle. Allowing some classes of
citizens to extract "reparations" from other classes of citizens for harms
done by some or many of the ancestors of members of one class to some or many
of the ancestors of another class, without setting any time limits, renders
the legal rights of all persons insecure. Evaluations of ancient wrongs are
susceptible to very distorted propaganda. Punishments of individuals who did
not commit the wrongs do not deter the recurrence of such wrongs in the
future, and indeed are themselves wrongs that foster further resentment and
breed more future claims for redress. The moral imperative holding the members
of one very imperfectly defined class, rather than persons who actually
committed the wrongs, for the wrongs committed to some of the members or
ancestors of another class, already doubtful, becomes increasingly doubtful as
time goes by, as does the power of such laws or other political acts to shape
behavior to desirable ends through incentives.  
  
[*] Technically, the term "statute of limitations" applies where a statute
expressly sets a time limit, and the doctrine of laches applies where no such
statute exists.

