Gojomo, I suspect voting becomes mostly mindless pretty quickly, and most
incentive is lost somewhere between the typical size of a jury and Dunbar's
number (about 150). But even a few thousand voters provide far better
incentive to vote well than a few million.  
  
Many ancient and medieval republics operated for a few centuries with a few
thousand voters. But there was far more to these republics than voting.
Informal and sometimes even formal bribery was widely practiced but there were
extensive mechanisms to distribute power and separate duties to prevent abuse
from getting out of hand. The experiences of Rome and Athens showed that this
did not scale to the size of an empire.  
  
The U.S. was and is, and modern democracies are, historically unusual
experiments in large-scale voting. Probably only widespread literacy and the
cultural homogeneity that comes from being literate in a common language make
it possible, and then only because most of the heavy lifting is actually done
by (e.g. in the U.S.) inside-the-Beltway mechanisms and the checks and
balances in our Constitution. We make a fetish out of elections but they are
merely one checking mechanism, and actually among the minor and not very
effective ones. The stuff you learned in civics class was indoctrination in
our religious ritual of voting and doesn't have much to do with how the system
actually works. (If there's enough interest, I can write up many the things
I've learned about K Street and the like).  
  
However, the Constitution was designed for a very decentralized confederation,
not for a vast national welfare state, and it's highly unlikely that it will
survive for another two hundred years without some radical change in the
meantime, which may involve returning to a decentralized confederation, a
nightwatchman/franchise system of jurisdiction on the old English model, a
contract-based system of arbitrators and security insurance, or some
combination of these. Good law has seldom depended on good voting beyond the
jury; that's a conceit of, and a fatal flaw of, modern legal positivism and
our civic religion.  
  
Medieval Venice had a very interesting voting regime that alternated elections
involving between 20 to 100 voters with lotteries, in about a dozen phases.
This arduous process, which somewhat resembles a cryptographic cipher,
guaranteed that bribers could not predict who would win, which greatly
discouraged the corruption of elections.  
  
Mike, I agree that hiring is a better analogy than making a specific policy
decision, but it's still the case that your typical employer puts far more
thought, observation, interaction, and investigation into the typical hiring
decision than does the typical voter.

