Here's an edited excerpt from my old essay "Measuring Value":  
  
Tax collection is the most efficient department of government. Its efficiency
rivals that of many private sector institutions.  

From the point of view of many taxpayers this is an incredible claim, given
that tax collectors take money we ourselves know how to spend quite well,
thank you, and often spend it on amazingly wasteful activities. And the rules
by which they take it often seem quite arbitrary. Tax rules are usually
complex but nevertheless fail to let us account for many events important to
the earning of our incomes that differentiate us from other taxpayers.  

How the money gets spent is quite outside the scope of my claim that tax
collectors are uncommonly efficient. It is the collection process itself that
is the subject of that claim, and the tax collection rules. This essay will
demonstrate the efficiency of tax collector's rules by two arguments:  

(1) First, we will show why tax collectors have an incentive to be efficient
(and what "efficiency" means in this context)

(2) Second, we will explore the problem of creating tax rules, and see how the
difficulty of measuring value rears its ugly head. Tax rules solve the value
measurement problem through brilliant, often very non-obvious solutions
similar to solutions developed in the private and legal sectors. Often (as,
for example, with accounting) tax collectors share solutions used to measure
value in private relationships (such as the absentee investor-management
relationship in joint stock corporations). It is in making these very
difficult and unintuitive trade-offs, and then executing them in a series of
queries, audits, and collection actions, that tax collectors efficiently
optimize their revenue, even if the results seem quite wasteful to the
taxpayer.  

The tax collector's incentives are aligned with the other branches of their
government in a task that benefits all associated with the government, namely
the collection of their revenue. No organization of any type collects more
revenue with fewer expenditures than tax collection agencies. Of course, they
have the advantage of coercion, but they must overcome measurement problems
that are often the same as other users of accounting systems, such as owners
of large companies. It is not surprising, then, that tax collectors have
sometimes pioneered value measurement techniques, and often have been the
first to bring them into large scale use.  

Like other kinds of auditors, the tax collector's measurement problem is
tougher than it looks. Investment manager Terry Coxon has described it
well[1]. Bad measures or inaccurate measurements allow some industries to
understate their income, while forcing others to pay taxes on income they
haven't really earned. Coxon describes the result: the industries that are
hurt tend to shrink. The industries that benefit pay fewer taxes than could be
extracted. In both cases, less revenue is generated for the tax man than he
might be able to get with better rules.  

This is an application of the Laffer curve to the fortunes of specific
industries. On this curve, developed by the brilliant economist Arthur Laffer,
as the tax rate increases, the amount of revenue increases, but at an
increasingly slower rate than the tax rate, due to increased avoidance,
evasion, and most of all disincentive to engage in the taxed activity. At a
certain rate due to these reasons tax revenues are optimized. Hiking the tax
rate beyond the Laffer optimum results in lower rather than higher revenues
for the government. Ironically, the Laffer curve was used by advocates for
lower taxes, even though it is a theory of tax collection optimum to
government revenue, not a theory of tax collection optimal to social welfare
or individual preference satisfaction.  

On a larger scale, the Laffer curve may be the most important economic law of
political history. Adams[2] uses it to explain the rise and fall of empires.
The most successful governments have been implicitly guided by their own
incentives – both their short-term desire for revenue and their long-term
success against other governments -- to optimize their revenues according to
the Laffer Curve. Governments that overburdened their taxpayers, such as the
Soviet Union and later Roman Empire, ended up on the dust-heap of history,
while governments that collected below the optimum were often conquered by
their better-funded neighbors. Democratic governments may maintain high tax
revenues over historical time by more peaceful means than conquering
underfunded states. They are the first states in history with tax revenues so
high relative to external threats that they have the luxury of spending most
of the money in non-military areas. Their tax regimes have operated closer to
the Laffer optimum than those of most previous kinds of governments.
(Alternatively, this luxury may be made possible by the efficiency of nuclear
weapons in deterring attack rather than the increased incentives of
democracies to optimize to tax collection).  

When we apply the Laffer curve to examining the relative impact of tax rules
on various industries, we conclude that the desire to optimize tax revenues
causes tax collectors to want to accurately measure the income or wealth being
taxed. Measuring value is crucial to determining the taxpayer's incentives to
avoid or evade the tax or opt out of the taxed activity. For their part,
taxpayers can and do spoof these measurements in various ways. Most tax
shelter schemes, for example, are based on the taxpayer minimizing reported
value while optimizing actual, private value. Tax collection involves a
measurement game with unaligned incentives, similar to but even more severe
than measurement games between owner and employee, investor and management,
store and shopper, and plaintiff-defendant (or judge-guilty party).  

As with accounting rules, legal damage rules, or contractual terms, the choice
of tax rules involves trading off complexity (or, more generally, the costs of
measurement) for more accurate measures of value. And worst of all, as with
the other rule-making problems, rule choices ultimately ground out on
subjective measures of value. Thus a vast number of cases are left where the
tax code is unfair or can be avoided. Since tax collectors are not mind
readers, tax rules and judgments must substitute for actual subjective values
its judgments of what the “reasonable” or “average” person's preferences would
be in the situation. Coxon provides the following example. Imagine that we
wanted to optimize the personal income tax rules to measure income as
accurately as possible. We might start reasoning along these lines:  

 __

> ... look a little closer and you find that an individual incurs costs and
expenses in earning a salary. He has to pay for transportation to and from
work. He may spend money on clothes he wouldn't otherwise buy and on lunches
that would cost less at home. And he may have spent thousands of dollars
acquiring the skills and knowledge he uses in this work.  
>  
>  Ideal, precise rules for measuring his income would, somehow, take all
these and other costs into account. The rules would deduct the cost of
commuting (unless he enjoys traveling about town early in the morning and
later in the afternoon). They would deduct the cost of the clothes he wouldn't
otherwise pay (to the extent it exceeds the cost of the clothes he would buy
anyway). They would deduct the difference between the cost of eating lunch at
work and the cost of lunch at home (unless he would eat lunch out anyway). And
each year these ideal rules would deduct a portion of the cost of his
education (unless he didn't learn anything useful in school or had enough fun
to offset the cost).  
>  
> [Because there are limits to complexity, and] because tax agents can't read
minds, the government gives them arbitrary rules to follow: no deductions are
allowed for commuting expenses, for clothing that is suitable for wearing
outside of work, for lunches that aren't part of the “business entertainment”
or for the cost of acquiring the skills a job requires (although you can
deduct the cost of improving your skills).

The resulting rules often seem arbitrary, but they are not. They are trade-
offs, often non-obvious but brilliant, between the costs of measuring more
value with greater accuracy and extra revenue extracted thereby. However, the
value measurement problem is hardly unique to tax collection. It is endemic
when assessing damages in contract and tort law, and when devising fines
punishments in administrative and criminal law. Many private sector rules
found in contracts, accounting, and other institutions also have the quality
that they use highly non-obvious measures of value that turn out, upon close
examination, to be brilliant solutions to seemingly intractable problems of
mind-reading and the unacceptable complexity of covering all cases or
contingencies. Such measurement problems occur in every kind of economic
system or relationship. The best solutions civilization has developed to solve
them are in most institutions brilliant but highly imperfect. There is vast
room for improvement, but failed large-scale experiments in attempts to
improve these measures can be devastating.  

The Laffer curve and measurement costs can also be used to analyze the
relative benefits of various tax collection schemes to government. Prior to
the industrial revolution, for example, the income tax was infeasible. Most
taxes were on the prices of commodities sold, or on various ad-hoc measures of
wealth such as the frontage of one's house. (This measurement game resulted in
the very tall and deep but narrow houses that can still be found in some
European cities such as Amsterdam. The stairs are so narrow that even normal
furniture has to be hauled up to the upper story and then through a window
with a small crane, itself a common feature on these houses).  
  
  
 _Taxes distorted the economy of the Netherlands -- quite literally. Here are
some houses in Amsterdam built in the 17th and 18th centuries, and a typical
narrow staircase. Furniture and other large objects must be hauled up by the
small cranes seen above the top-story windows._  

Prior to the industrial revolution, incomes were often a very private matter.
However, starting in England in the early nineteenth century, large firms grew
to an increasing proportion of the economy. Broadly speaking, large firms and
joint-stock companies were made possible by two phases of accounting advances.
The first phase, double-entry bookkeeping, was developed for the trading banks
and "super companies" of early fourteenth century Italy. The second phase were
accounting and reporting techniques developed for the larger joint stock
companies of the Netherlands and England, starting with the India companies in
the seventeenth century.  

Accounting allowed manager-owners to keep track of employees and (in the
second phase) for non-management owners to keep track of managers. These
accounting techniques, along with the rise of literacy and numeracy among the
workers, provided a new way for tax collectors to measure value. Once these
larger companies came to handle a sufficient fraction of an jurisdiction's
value of transactions, it was rational for governments to take advantage of
their measurement techniques, and they did so -- the result being the most
lucrative tax scheme ever, the income tax.  
  

#### References

  
[1] Adams, Charles, For Good and Evil: The Impact of Taxes on Civilization  
  
[2] Coxon, T., 1996 Keep What You Earn, Times Business/Random House

