Devin, I am no longer commenting over there, but I do greatly appreciate the
thoughtful comments of yourself, Vladimir, etc. and will respond indirectly
here in the future with posts about Roman Law and absolutism, and will happily
respond to non-trolling comments at that time.  
  
In your currency scenario, I think many high-power currencies would develop
and trade with low transaction costs -- not unlike what is spoken of today
informally as using whatever liquid securities one happens to have a lot of
(e.g. companies that have a liquid market in their stock) as "currencies"
(e.g. to buy other companies). International trade (such as armaments) is
still sometimes done on a barter basis. So the transaction cost assumption
doesn't hold for sufficiently large transactions, even today, and I expect
automated currency exchange, multi-currency accounting, and deregulation would
in your scenario make them even lower, so that many medium-sized B2B
transactions, but still not most consumer retail, could use a wide variety of
alternative currencies. Since these micro-polities would not converge on a
single standard right off the bat, businessfolk would get used to a multi-
currency world and we'd have huge incentives to develop tech to deal with
multiple currencies.  
  
 _Do you envision that the basket would be strictly defined ( ie, one share
represents 1 gram of gold, 10 grams of silver, and a barrel of oil). Or would
the basket have some sort of floating mechanism, whereby the basket components
would depend on current market exchange rates?_  
  
The industrial commodity and precious metals portions would be strictly
defined, but to diversify further and include REIT and stock index ETFs --
made possible by an electronic redemption window that gives out the ETF
securities in exchange for SzaboShares -- those would be defined by the index
fund managers, who are presumably independent of SzaboExchange.  
  
A gold standard doesn't diversify risk. Some of the risks are political --
metal detectors have made gold hard to smuggle and thus easy to ban, and there
supply risks -- if somebody discovers easy gold undersea or on Mars, or
figures out a nuclear scheme to breed gold from some other element, its
collectible premium is hosed.  
  
The main advantage of a gold standard is that you can get your hands on actual
physical gold which is independent of trust in third parties. But this is moot
as long as the ETF funds were functioning -- you could redeem SzaboShares for
the ETFs, then barter the ETF shares for gold coins or bullion. If gold
sellers were still accepting SzaboShares at normal market values (i.e. you are
not trying to dump SzaboShares as part of a general distrust in or a run on my
bank), you could just directly exchange your SzaboShares for gold with them. I
expect in an environment you describe with no Continent-wide regulator, that
on-line brokers will facilitate such barters for reasonable fees.  
  
It's also possible that bit gold will pan out with lower security and scarcity
vulnerabilities than gold.  
  
Bottom line -- I believe that if we need to we can largely automate currency
exchange and multi-currency accounting incidental to B2B transactions, as well
as a variety of large-scale barter exchanges and financial swaps directly from
one security to another without an intermediate standard currency. The main
standard people will need is (a) to show others their books, and this can be
done through software, and (b) for small retail transactions, unless somehow
those too can be automated (e.g. you scan a bar code with your IPhone 77, and
it displays the price in your favorite currency, and when you swipe your card
it debits your account in your favorite currency and credits the store's
account in its favorite currency). The big problem is automating so that (a)
people don't have to translate prices in their heads and (b) so that the user
interface for discovering the price in your favorite currency is minimal.

