(trying again :-)  
  
 _I just checked the ratio of oil price to gold price in Excel over the
1998-2008 period.  
  
While the line is pretty much straight, it's not flat: In 1998 a barrel of oil
used to cost 0.05 oz of gold. Today the ratio is 0.11 oz for a barrel._  
  
Here's great set of charts of the gold/oil ratio. The oil/gold ratio is
trading at the top of its historical range: it traded at 0.12 in 1975 and 2002
and 0.11 in 1982, but usually has been closer to the 0.05 and as low as 0.03
in the early 1970s (refuting the idea that oil shortages triggered the
inflation of the 1970s: gold went up first, and quite sharply, after the
dollar went off gold, a rise trailed by oil). So the current ratio, if
maintained, may indicate something a bit beyond the historical norm. This
would probably be due to combination of one or more of the following 5
factors:  
  
(1) oil demand to immediate stockpile ratios are far lower than gold, making
oil supply less elastic. This makes oil futures a better short-term hedge of
inflation than gold.  
  
(2) there is an ongoing historical switch from precious metals to commodity
derivatives as the alternative or hedge to fiat currencies, so the precious
metals are losing their monetary value relative to other commodities. I expect
this trend to continue: as an inflation hedge other commodities will on
average slightly outperform gold.  
  
(3) differences in supply: oil production has been disrupted by the Iraq war,
while gold production has not been disrupted. (This echoes the previous highs
in the oil/gold ratio which were times of temporary oil supply disruption).  
  
(4) differencs in supply: oil technology not keeping up with geological
depletion (not "peak oil", but still getting scarcer a bit faster than the
technology is improving).  
  
(5) The supposed increase industrial demand for oil.  
  
(3), (4), and (5) get all the press but account IMHO for only a fraction of
the divergence between oil and gold. Indeed, I don't believe (5) is a factor
at all: the worlwide growth rate of demand has not shifted upward, rather
faster demand growth in Asia has been offset by lower demand growth in the
U.S. and Europe. I believe (2), the decline of precious metals relative to
commodity derivatives as ways of hedging fiat currency contract terms, to be a
dominant factor, and this is consistent with most other mineral commodities
also having risen faster than gold and silver over the same timeframe.

