 _I'm still having some trouble wrapping my head around these ideas, they're
so different from the way I'm used to thinking about things._  
  
George, it is a sad fact that modern culture engrains the fraudulent sovereign
government vs. anarchy dichotomy so deeply into our heads that it's hard to
imagine anything else. When I started realizing what was going on in these old
court cases it seriously blew my mind. It's a radically different political
paradigm that our culture has utterly forgotten. I don't know of any history
or political science one can read from the 19th or 20th centuries that carries
even a hint that the author is familiar with this paradigm. Even the stuff
written about medieval and colonial era law takes an anachronistically
sovereigntist view -- the authors do not understand any other way of seeing
things. Modern law assumes that "property" is merely economic and substantive,
quite distinct from procedure. I only discovered the paradigm of political
property rights by reading ancient court cases and recognizing the basic
property-law structure of ancient legal procedure.  
  
_the idea that someone can own as transferable property the right to license
medical practitioners in a region feels wrong to me_  
  
I'm not advocating a wholesale return to all the particular historical
franchises. Indeed, I'm not advocating a return to the purely economic
franchises at all. I'm against the franchises that were just legally enforced
monopolies, where, as you say, economic competition is preferable.  
  
I am rather advocating a rebirth of the political property rights view of law
and politics, and that we should experiment with a wide variety of political
property rights. Political property rights are rigorously defined rights to
coerce one's fellow humans in certain very particular ways, following
procedural rules. Eventually, political property rights could replace
sovereign governments and the open-ended coercive powers they have so often
abused.  
  
With coercive powers, competition is usually a bug rather than a feature. For
example, let's say we have unlimited entry for tax collectors: any person can
collect up to 10% of anybody else's income. Your fellow citizen-collectors
would end up taking practically 100% of your income -- far higher than the
Laffer maximum. By contrast, a rational monopolist tax collector will just
collect the Laffer maximum. Read what Mancur Olson has to say about roving vs.
stationary bandits for more on this.  
  
Nevertheless, I'm not averse to contractually created law where it can work.
It mostly can work in contract, marriage, and other relational areas of law.
However it mostly cannot work in areas of tort, property, and criminal law.
For those areas, contract-based law must be at least supplemented with certain
very limited political property rights -- for example rights to subpoena tort
defendants, witnesses, and juries, rights to arrest and punish criminals, and
so on.  
  
Michael, I again appreciate your Scots law perspective. "Pleas of the crown"
were generally a separate franchise under English law also. By the 17th
century there was a very long list of capital offenses.

