There are two examples in the article, the first being Chesterton's fence, the
second being the Lady Gaga concert after an exhausting week of work that makes
you no longer feel like going. If you don't like the Lady Gaga concert, think
of it as a game of a team you like, or hearing a highly regarded speaker on
the subject of rationality techniques, or anything else that floats your boat
that you would have at some point decided to shell out money for. I also
welcome suggestions of more examples where measures of value you or others
made in the past are not easy to recreate.  
  
Indeed one possibility is that one has had a genuine long-term change of
preferences, or that there has been a genuine long-term change of evidence, or
in the case of the concert a change that will at last at least all night long.
And forgetting why one wanted the concert ticket may indeed signal such a
change. In the example, you may indeed not enjoy the concert because you are
exhausted, or because you bought the ticket on a whim and never really wanted
to go that badly, and thus can't remember why now.  
  
On the other hand suppose -- and I'd argue this is more common in the real
world, as opposed to the experimental labs of behavioral economists -- there's
been no substantial and long-term cange of preferences -- just a momentary
distraction, such as being exhausted from a hard week's work. After you lose
the distraction, and that pink hair or Yankee home runs or visions of the
power of rationality make you forget the workweek, chances are you'll be fine,
and going to the concert or meeting will recall to you why you wanted to go,
and it will be more enjoyable than the pajamas and hot chocolate (or watch the
game on TV, or read the book instead of go to the meeting) which you can have
on any other evening.  
  
Furthermore, the way our brains work is that we often consider substantial
amounts of information, come to a decision, and then go on to some other
problem that requires some other information, so that we move the old
information out of conscious memory -- and it may thereafter be difficult to
retrieve most of it. So, except for the trivial situations (e.g. comparing X
dollar against Y dollars) encountered in the academic experiments, we need to
trust our old selves and not be constantly revisiting old decisions: or to put
it economicallhy, we need to put substantial weight on our previous
investments, which signal to us, across our lossy and distracted memories, the
value we placed in things.  
  
In the Lady Gaga concert (or other event you had bought a ticket for) it might
also help, besides rembembering the price, to remember how much thought and
research, or lack thereof, you put into it, and how often you spent
daydreaming about it, just as a quantitative estimate - or if you keep a
diary, remembering whether or not you left a note about it in your diary --
rather than the often futile exercise of trying to remember the details behind
why you had such preferences. There are things in addition to the sunk cost of
the ticket that can be used as proxy measures of value. But the sunk costs are
one of them, and if you're really exhausted or distracted it may be the only
one you clearly remember.

