For the purposes of estimating the value of a project, risk has for simplicity
often been treated as spread out evenly over the life of a project. For normal
projects these risks can usually be fairly approximated by estimating risk per
unit time. This occurs in, for example, the net present value (NPV) formula
for estimating the value of a project where a constant interest rate risk
premium is used. In a typical space mission, however, risk tends to be
concentrated at particular events such as launches, burns, flybies and
landings. Just floating out in space is relatively quite low risk, which is
why we can fly to Jupiter and Saturn with failure rates not significantly
greater than missions to the moon or Mars. All four of the spacecraft that
have so far intentionally been flown beyond Saturn -- Pioneers 10 and 11, and
Voyagers 1 and 2 -- had many initial glitches. But since passing beyond Saturn
they have travelled on for nearly two decades, far beyond Pluto, with no
substantial and unexpected failure. The Voyagers continue to send back
valuable data on the very edge of the solar system, where the solar wind gives
way to the interstellar influence -- more than 80 times as far from the sun as
our own earth.  
  
There is a small risk of component failure that tends to obey a Poisson
distribution that grows over time. But the risk in even earth-orbiting
satellites is dominated by launch and orbit-insertion failures, and other
failures at the start of the satellite's lifetime, which are unrelated to the
satellite's expected lifetime.  
  
Thus the vast majority of the risk of most space projects does not grow
exponentially with their duration, and indeed is usually not closely
correlated to their duration in any way. We would thus get an exponentially
wrong answer by a line of reasoning that estimated the risk of a generic deep
space mission as X%/year, and deduce by plugging that risk into the net
present value (NPV) equation that, for example, an 8 year mission is
substantially costlier (due to a risk that grows exponentially over time) than
a 2 year mission. An example of this fallacy is NPV analysis that assumes a
constant risk premium for comparison of futuristic lunar and asteroid mining
scenarios. All such papers that I've seen (e.g. this one) fall victim to this
fallacy. To use NPV properly we need to account for the risks of particular
events in the mission (in the mining scenario primarily launches, burns, and
mining operations) to estimate a total risk, and divide that total risk by the
duration of the mission to get a risk premium. The risk premium per year for
the longer mission will thus probably be substantially lower than for a
shorter mission (implying an overall risk slighly higher for the longer
mission, all other things being equal).  
  
An even more accurate method for evaluating risk in space projects is called
real options analysis. It has changed valuation from the old static NPV model
to a dynamic model based on specific risks. One improvement this brings is
removing the assumption of constant risk, which we've seen is wildly
inappropriate for deep space missions. Another idea real options brings us is
that designing a project to postpone choices adds value to the project when
there will be better information in the future. A science mission example: if
a scientific event could occur at either target A or target B, it's best to
postpone the choice of target until we know where the event is going to occur.
If that's possible, we now have a scientifically more valuable mission.  
  
Orbital planning for deep space missions tends to plan for a fixed mission
ahead of time. Real options analysis says that the project gains value if we
design in options to change the project's course in the future. For orbital
mechanics that means designing the trajectory to allow retargeting at certain
windows, even at some cost of delta-v and time. (Whether the tradeoff is worth
it can be analyzed using real options mathematics, if we can make comparison
estimates of different scientific targets using a common utilitarian scale).  
  
In the context of an Jupiter orbiter swinging by various Jovian moons, such
options might include hanging around an interesting moon longer or changing
the trajectory to target. The idea is instead of plotting a single trajectory,
you plot a tree of trajectories, with various points where the mission
controllers can choose trajectory A or trajectory B based on mission
opportunies.  
  
A shorthand way to think of real options analys is that the project is modeled
as a game tree with each node on the tree representing a choice (i.e. a real
option) that can be made by the project managers. The choices are called "real
options" because the math is the same as for financial options (game trees,
Black-Scholes, etc.) but they represent real-world choices, for example the
option of a vineyeard to sell its wine this year or let it age at least
another year, the option of a mine to open or close, or expand or shrink its
operations, etc.  
  
The orbital planning I've seen tends to plan for a fixed mission ahead of
time. Real options analysis says that the project may gain value if we design
in options to change the project's course in the future. For orbital mechanics
that means designing the trajectory to allow retargeting at certain windows,
even at some cost of delta-v and time. (Whether the tradeoffs between delta-v,
time, and particular real options are worth it can be analyzed using real
options mathematics, if we can compare different scientific targets using a
common utilitarian scale).  
  
In the context of the Jovian moons project, such options might include hanging
around Europa longer if a volcano is going there (like the one discovered on
the similar moon Enceladus) or if some evidence of life is found (or leaving
it sooner if not), or changing the trajectory so that the next target is
Europa instead Ganymede if a volcano suddenly springs up on Europa, or to Io
if an interesting volcano springs up there. The idea is instead of plotting a
single trajectory, we plot a tree of trajectories, with various points where
the mission controllers can choose trajectory A or trajectory B (sometimes
with further options C, D, etc.) based on mission opportunities. Other
trajectory options might include hanging around a particular moon for longer
or changing the view angle to the target. We may trade off extra delta-v,
extra time, or both in order to enable future changes in the trajectory plan.  
  
Here is more on real options analysis. Real options analysis is also quite
valuable for the research and developoment phase of a project. Here is a good
paper on real options analysis for space mission design. My thanks to Shane
Ross and Mark Sonter for their helpful comments on space project evaluation
and planning.  
  
UPDATE: This post is featured in the Carnival of Space #22.

