Great to read you again in the comments section, Daniel. Despite having many
ancestors from interior Eurasia, I'm afraid I can't share any rosy view of its
ancient ways. Almost all of the middle of the Eurasian continent sat at very
"southwest" isoclines on the Malthusian graph, the opposite of where we in the
modern developed world sit. This took the form of extemely low populatrion
densities combined with somewhat higher standards of living (better diet) but
more frequent violence. Quasi-pastoralists achieved many times the population
density of interior Eurasia, and after hay and institutions of stationary
society derived from Rome, probably hundreds of times the population density
without most of the substantial diminution in the diet characteristic of
grain-centered cultures. They thereby achieved levels of trade and
urbanization unheard of in interior Eurasia and eventually in the industrial
revolution exceeding those of grain cultures. Since there are plenty of good
soils and climates for settled agriculture in central Eurasia, its extremely
poor position on the Malthusian isocline must be based on the same pathology
that caused the Greek and post-Roman Dark Ages, namely roving bandits. With so
few geographical protections against the likes of Huns, Turks, Mongols, and
yes even Magyars, nearly all of interior Eurasia lived in a permanent Dark
Ages until modern times.  
  
With rare exceptions -- the tribute capitals of conquerors like the Mongols,
protectable regions like the Crimean penninsula, expensively secured trade
towns along the Silk Road -- and later where the Rus (most likely) introduced
hay and thus a degree of quasi-pastoralism to create Russia -- stationary
cultures in central Eurasia were extremely small and fragile with practically
no urbanization beyond the small village and the ephemeral tent fair. Ill
protected and frequently raided by roving bandits. No stationary bandit
society in interior Eurasia achieved there anything remotely close to what
they achieved in Eastern Asia and Western Europe.  
  
As for who is better adapted to modern life, that is a pretty open question.
The main food adaptation problem we face is radically different: adapting to
too much food and food our ancestors didn't eat. Both settled peoples and
nomads lived with a small group their entire lives, so modern life with its
Rolodexes or Facebook friends lists filled with hundreds of acquaintences who
we haven't seen in years, (or thanks to the Internet never even met), is
unlike practically all major traditional lifestyles.

