"...you appear to subscribe to the Whig theory of history... You write about
the monarchical period, but you always take the side opposed to the monarch."  
  
It was quite popular in the 20th century -- especially among the same people
who ignored the crimes of communism -- to be snide about the Whig theory. But
there is much of value in it. It is still the most mature and realistic
libertarian theory that exists. Like much else it has been buried by the
Progressive revolution, so I highly recommend reading what the Whigs
themselves said (e.g. Trenchard and Gordon in Cato's Letters) rather than the
idiotic slanders you might have read about them in 20th century Progressive
tomes.  
  
The main thing wrong with it, on which you and I have a lot of common ground,
is the way it overly strengthened Parliament. Like most ideologies it
discarded too much of tremendous value -- especially it discarded the mature
Anglo-Norman model of political property rights in favor of a republican
version of the Romanist delegation model. By this route it evetually morphed
from distrusting power into an apotheosis of government in the guise of "the
people." (And that, BTW, besides the factors Smith cited, is the main reason
Progressivism took eventually took over).  
  
Thus unlike the Whigs I am quite a fan of monarcho-francise England and to
some degree (despite my criticisms and warnings) of some kinds of colonial
government. Our big differences are  
  
(1) I am not willing in an ideological rush to throw out the Whig babies with
their dirty bathwater. The role of highly evolved corporate controls like
separation of powers and the principle of least authority, for example, remain
crucial.  
  
(2) that I am much more of a fan of the forgotten franchise part and you are a
fan of what the Romanists recognized, namely the sole monarch. Your view of it
seems to be the Romanist stereotype of "feudalism", that medieval government
really was just a military hierarchy. This is quite far from the case,
especially in England that was very secure from invasion after the Conquest.
While the ownership often did have origins -- several hundred years back -- in
the Conquest, relations after that time were governed almost entirely by
property law -- a largely peer-to-peer structure which is almost the exact
opposite of a master-servant military hierarchy. But again this is an idea
lost to the modern world and I don't expect folks to pick up on it quickly,
alas. I can only just urge readers to again Wikipedia "subject matter
jurisdiction" and then Google "jurisdiction as property" and read carefully.
There is over 900 years of Romanist brainwashing (about 500 years in the
English-speaking world) to overcome in order to understand this stuff.  
  
All modern political scientists. including all libetarian and "anarcho-
capitalist" ones, suffer under Romanist fallacies, so one cannot take any of
them too seriously. Olson is probably the one I agree most with, but largely
just on basic theory since like all political science the rest is quite
incomplete and speculative. I don't disagree with Hoppe in principle, but one
thing he seems to have missed (and you definitely missed) is that the same
argument applies to political property rights _decentralized by subject matter
rather than by territory_. That is the key insight you are missing.  
  
Furthermore, these time preferences start out extremely weak for a new regime.
They are even weak compared to other forces for at least the first half-
century of monarchy as the Kim Il Jung family demonstrates. Even if monarchy
is great in theory how do you get from here to there? You don't have to
believe in the Singularity to recognize that our cultural norms are changing
much faster than in the Middle Ages and that our children cannot be guarunteed
the same political rights we wish to devise to them. We no longer live in a
world of long time horizons, particularly in politics.

