I will soon be posting portions of a translation of the Magna Carta (the Great
Charter) interspersed with my own commentary. Besides the background of the
above link, here is some background on the nature of law and political
structure in the lands of King John in 1215, and on why the document is more
relevant to the modern United States than it is to modern England.  
  
What follows is a necessarily oversimplified summary, but it can be used to
reconstruct almost all of the law of King John's England pertinent to Magna
Carta. Such a summary must in some ways be very alien to modern minds, so if
you question this summary in any way please read the Magna Carta itself first
before commenting, as you will probably find that the alien law as I describe
it is in fact reflected in that Great Charter.  
  
The basic building block of English legal and political structure was quite
simple: property. Tyler Cowen talks about modern "markets in everything." In
King John's England there was property in everything. Often, however, it was
property that could not be easily bought or sold, but only inherited or
transfered in marriage (like the kingship itself). Every political office and
every legal right was such a property right. Jurisdiction, the right to make
law, as well as goods and land -- all was property. Often these rights were
appurtenant (i.e. attached to) rights in other kinds of property. For example,
the jurisdiction and right to enforce judgments of manorial courts via certain
remedies (a subset of the remedies available to royal common law courts) came
bundled with tenure to the manor'sland. For example, if the king had granted a
land to a lord in fee simple (i.e. perpetual) tenure, that lord would by an
appurtenant express grant or sometimes implicitly (by prescription or custom)
have jurisdiction over the manor's sub-tenants and villiens (serfs).
Jursidiction over market fairs and their participants, and the ability to
enforce court judgments by the limited remedy of distraining (attaching) goods
in those markets, came bundled with the royal or baronial franchise to operate
the market. Even in the 18th century, Blackstone described the entire
political structure of England under the legal category of "the rights of
persons." Every office and authority was held as a property right, and every
liberty of a tenant or other subject was an easement that restricted such a
property right.  
  
Tenures such as fee simple, estates for life, etc. are the ancestors of modern
forms of ownership (which still go under these names), but are also akin to
leases insofar as they entailed obligations such as to pay rent. Rent paid to
the king included "scutage" and "aid" -- the ancestor of what we now call
taxes. The Magna Carta forces the king to gain the "consent" of his immediate
tenants via a vote of what became Parliament before collecting such rents.
Tenancy was also in some ways akin to modern citizenship, as the obligations
of a tenant often included providing military service and submitting to the
jurisdiction of the landlord where such jurisdiction was appurtenant to that
lord's property. The jurisdiction of the royal courts was appurtenant to the
king's original ownership of his realm, and many lords also had jurisdictions
appurtenant to their manors.  
  
Thus, the Magna Carta's language is quite akin to either a medieval or a
modern property deed that grants various rights and reserves various easements
appurtenant (i.e. attached to) the property in question. Any such deed,
license, or charter grants a subset of the bundle of rights belonging to the
current owner to the new owner or (in the case of a lease) tenant. The Magna
Carta is such a property deed. The property in question is the entire kingdom
and various subsets thereof, and the various rights and easements are
appurtenant to the entire kingdom or particular subsets thereof. The rights
the charter grants are to "all free men of the kingdom" or various subsets
thereof. The "kingdom" is the property of the king and his heirs from which he
is granting rights to English subjects and their heirs.  
  
Except for the king, who under Norman theory owned all original rights in the
realm, these rights took the form of tenures (somewhat akin to our leases) and
franchises. In theory all such rights became such by grants from the king. In
practice these "grants" often recognized pre-existing rights. Thus they were
akin to both prescriptive property rights and to natural or customary legal
rights. These tenures or franchises were often granted perpetuity; sometimes
they were for a term of years. If they were granted in perpetuity, under
English law (which unlike Roman law did not recognize the totalitarian idea of
sovereignty) they could not be legally taken back by future kings. The Magna
Carta, for example, grants "all the liberties written out below, to have and
to keep for them and their heirs, of us and our heirs." The listed liberties
are a mix of rights granted to pacify rebellious subjects and the recognition
of prescriptive rights, often of a very broad (unenumerated) nature.  
  
The totalitarian idea of sovereignty, derived from the ancient law of the
Roman emperors in Justinian's _Institutes_ , whereby emperors were the source
of all law (the sovereign) and could always disobey or retract their own
edicts, was much later adopted (at least the retraction part) in England as
the sovereignty of Parliament. This new "democratic" sovereignty asserted that
Parliament could abrogate rights granted in perpetuity by previous royal
charters. This was the main legal idea in dispute in the American Revolution.
The colonists argued that Parliament could not abrogate the royal charters to
the colonies which, like the parts of the Magna Carta which recognized the
rights of cities, towns, and the Church in a sweeping way, recognized customs
and liberties of the inhabitants of colonies in a sweeping way.  
  
During and after their successful rebellion, the North American colonists
adopted state constitutions, the Articles of Confederation, and the United
States Constitution. These were modeled on previous royal charters and,
contrary to the recent innovation of Parliamentary sovereignty that the
colonists rebelled against, could not be abrogated by mere legislation. In a
democratic compromise, however, (following James Wilson's vague idea of the
"sovereignty of the people"), these charters were adopted by super-majority
votes of "the people" (typically conventions of representatives) and could be
amended by super-majority votes (legislatures, referendums, and/or
conventions). Thus, the United States introduced democracy while maintaining
the idea of perpetual rights that cannot be abrogated by mere majorities. Thus
the Magna Carta, one of the earliest charters granting perpetual rights, is
even more important to the United States than it is to the democratic, yet
totalitarian, modern England.

