  
_Images: Copper halfpenny minted by the Darbies' Coalbrookdale Company and
celebrating the Iron Bridge._  
  
Here's an interesting letter from the dawn of the industrial revolution. It
was written in 1775 by Abiah Darby, mother of Abraham Darby (III) and wife of
Abraham Darby (II), the son of Abraham Darby (I), who invented the process of
smelting iron with coke made from coal. The Darby family were Quakers and
produced several early industrialists and engineers. This small letter makes
or implies several points that may have been crucial to the growth of industry
that makes modern wealth possible:  
  
* The importance of property rights and market prices in maintaining a sustainable balance between the supply and demand of wood. ("woods for charcoal became very Scarce and landed Gentlemen rose the prices of cord wood exceeding high"). Although wood became expensive, there remained a sufficient supply of wood for the buildings, mine works, wagons, rails, etc.  
  
* The ability of people living with sufficient technology and secure property rights to bypass and surpass ecological limitations (in this case substituting coal for wood, and later due to this cheap iron-making process, iron and steel for wood).  
  
* Decentralized money issue. Abiah points out that the remote area of Coalbrookdale, where coal and iron were available, still often operated as a barter economy. Thus apparently Abraham had to either coin tokens or open a bank to issue notes (common during this era) so that the Darbies could pay their workers.  
  
* Darby II's invention of the iron-tracked railroad (improving the productivity of the horses by over six times and precursor to the later steam-powered railroad).  
  
* The ability to securely establish large machine works and lay 20 miles of track out in the boondocks and not have them be torn up by trespassers and used for other purposes or confiscated or taxed into oblivion by local lords. In most of the rest of the world that could not be taken for granted.  
  
* The use of atmospheric pressure (Papin/Savery/Newcomen) steam engines to drain the mines and supply water to the waterwheel pond. (The atmospheric engine apparently wasn't up to the job of directly powering the bellows for the blast furnaces; that came later with the Watt steam pressure engine). Steam engines allowed water to be pumped out of mines at a far greater rate, and thus allowed coal and iron mines to be dug far deeper, creating a large and inexpensive new supply of coal and iron.  
  
The link is a Word document, which I don't recommend opening for security
reasons, but I've copied the contents below:  
  
http://www.umassd.edu/ir/Resources/MetalandMining/m2.doc  
  
Mrs. Abiah Darby on developments in the Darby ironworks at Coalbrookdale,
1708-1763  
  
Esteemed Friend,  
  
Thy very acceptable favour of the 9th ulto. claim'd my earliest
acknowledgments, which I should immediately have made, had not thy kind
condescension in taking notice of my late honour'd Husband, and requesting to
be inform'd of any circumstance which may be interesting relating him, caused
my delay-to recollect what might occur concerning his transactions or
improvements in the Manufactory of Iron, so beneficial to this nation. But
before I proceed further, I cannot help lamenting with thee in thy just
observation, " that it has been universally observed, that the Destroyers of
mankind are recorded and remembered, while the Benefactors are unnoticed and
forgotten". This seems owing to the depravity of the mind, which centres in
reaping the present advantages, and suffering obscurity to vail the original
causes of such benefits; and even the very names of those to whom we are
indebted for the important discoveries, to sink into oblivion. Whereas if they
were handed down to posterity, gratitude would naturally arise in the
commemoration of their ingenuity, and the great advantages injoyed from their
indefatigable labours-I now make free to communicate what I have heard my
Husband say, and what arises from my own knowledge; also what I am inform'd
from a person now living, whose father came here as a workman at the first
beginning of these Pit Coal Works.  
  
Then to begin at the original. It was my Husband's Father, whose name he bore
(Abraham Darby and who was the first that set on foot the Brass Works at or
near Bristol) that attempted to mould and cast Iron pots, &c., in sand instead
of Loam (as they were wont to do, which made it a tedious and more expensive
process) in which he succeeded. This first attempt was tryed at an Air Furnace
in Bristol. About the year 1709 he came into Shropshire to Coalbrookdale, and
with other partners took a lease of the works, which only consisted of an old
Blast Furnace and some Forges. He here cast Iron Goods in sand out of the
Blast Furnace that blow'd with wood charcoal; for it was not yet thought of to
blow with Pit Coal. Sometime after he suggested the thought, that it might be
practable to smelt the Iron from the ore in the blast Furnace with Pit Coal:
Upon this he first try'd with raw coal as it came out of the Mines, but it did
not answer. He not discouraged, had the coal coak'd into Cynder, as is done
for drying Malt, and it then succeeded to his satisfaction. But he found that
only one sort of pit Coal would suit best for the purpose of making good Iron.
-These were beneficial discoveries, for the moulding and casting in sand
instead of Loam was of great service, both in respect to expence and
expedition. And if we may compare little things with great-as the invention of
printing was to writing, so was the moulding and casting in Sand to that of
Loam. He then erected another Blast Furnace, and enlarged the Works. This
discovery soon got abroad and became of great utility.  
  
This Place and its environs was very barren, little money stiring amongst the
Inhabitants. So that I have heard they were Obliged to exchange their small
produce one to another instead of money, until he came and got the Works to
bear, and made Money Circulate amongst the different parties who were employed
by him. Yet notwithstanding the Service he was of to the Country, he had
opposers and ill-wishers, and a remarkable circumstance of awful Memory
occurs; of a person who endeavour'd to hinder the horses which carried the
Iron Stone and Coal to the Furnaces, from coming through a road that he
pretended had a right to Oppose: and one time when he saw the horses going
alone, he in his Passion, wished he might Never Speak More if they should Ever
come that way again. And instantly his Speech was stopped, and altho' he lived
Several years after yet he Never Spoke More!  
  
My Husband's Father died early in life; a religious good man, and an Eminent
Minister amongst the people call'd Quakers.  
  
My Husband Abraham Darby was but Six years old when his Father died-but he
inherited his genius-enlarg'd upon his plan, and made many improvements. One
of Consequence to the prosperity of these Works was as they [were] very short
of water that in the Summer or dry Seasons they were obliged to blow very
slow, and generally blow out the furnaces once a year, which was attended with
great loss. But my Husband proposed the Erecting a Fire Engine to draw up the
Water from the lower Works and convey it back into the upper po6ls, that by
continual rotation of the Water the furnaces might be plentifully supplied;
which answered Exceeding Well to these Works, and others have followed the
Example.  
  
But all this time the making of Barr Iron at Forges from Pit Coal pigs was not
thought of. About 26 years ago my Husband conceived this happy thought-tbat it
might be possible to make bar from pit coal pigs. Upon this he Sent some of
our pigs to be tryed at the Forges, and that no prejudice might arise against
them he did not discover from whence they came, or of what quality they were.
And a good account being given of their working, he errected Blast Furnaces
for Pig Iron for Forges. Edward Knight Esqr a capitol Iron Master urged my
Husband to get a patent, that he might reap the benefit for years of this
happy discovery: but he said he would not deprive the public of Such an
Acquisition which he was Satisfyed it would be; and so it has proved, for it
soon spread, and Many Furnaces both in this Neighbourhood and Several other
places have been errected for this purpose.  
  
Had not these discoveries been made the Iron trade of our own produce would
have dwindled away, for woods for charcoal became very Scarce and landed
Gentlemen rose the prices of cord wood exceeding high-indeed it would not have
been to be got. But from pit coal being introduced in its stead the demand for
wood charcoal is much lessen'd, and in a few years I apprehend will set the
use of that article aside.  
  
Many other improvements he was the author of. One of Service to these Works
here they used to carry all their mine and coal upon horses' backs but he got
roads made and laid with Sleepers and rails as they have them in the North of
England for carring them to the Rivers, and brings them to the Furnaces in
Waggons. And one waggon with three horses will bring as much as twenty horses
used to bring on horses' backs. But this laying the roads with wood begot a
Scarcity and rose the price of it. So that of late years the laying of the
rails of cast Iron was substituted; which altho' expensive, answers well for
Ware and Duration. We have in the different Works near twenty miles of this
road which cost upwards of Eight hundred pounds a mile. That of Iron Wheels
and axletrees for these waggons was I believe my Husband's Invention.  
  
He kept himself confined to the Iron Trade and the Necessary Appendages
annex'd thereto. He was just in Ms dealings-of universal benevolence and
charity, living Strictly to the Rectitude of the Divine and Moral Law, held
forth by his great Lord and Saviour, had an extraordinary command over his own
spirit, which thro' the Assistance of Divine Grace enabled to bear up with
fortitude above all opposition: for it may seem very strange, so valuable a
man should have Antagonists, yet he had. Those called Gentlemen with an
Envious Spirit could not bear to see him prosper; and others covetious; strove
to make every advantage by raising their Rents of their collieries and lands
in which he wanted to make roads; and endeavour'd to stop the works. But he
surmounted all: and died in Peace beloved and Lamented by many.

