From Secure Property Titles with Owner Authority:  

> In all cases of property rights there is a defined space, whether a
namespace or physical space, and the task is to agree on simple attributes of
or rights to control subdivisions of that space. In some cases a name or other
symbol corresponds to a person or object owned or controlled by that person.
For example, Internet users must agree on which domain name corresponds to
which web site operator. In other cases we are simply concerned with control
over a subdivision of the space. With real estate we must agree on who owns
various rights (to occupy the surface, to mine the minerals under, etc.) to a
piece of land. With radio spectrum we must agree on who owns what range of
frequencies and in what physical space (or transmitting power as an easily
observed approximation of physical space used).  
>  
> ...all such [multiparty problems of] control over the semantics of symbols,
to be made and respected across trust boundaries, are problems of agreeing on
and maintaining property rights...  
>  
> ...New advances in replicated database technology will give us the ability
to securely maintain and transfer ownership for a wide variety of kinds of
property, including not only land but chattels, securities, names, and
addresses. This technology will give us public records which can "survive a
nuclear war", along the lines of the original design goal of the Internet.
While thugs can still take physical property by force, the continued existence
of correct ownership records will remain a thorn in the side of usurping
claimants...  
>  
> The ideal title database would have the following properties:  
>  
> (1) Current owner Alice should be able transfer her title to only a single
relying counterparty (similar to the "double spending" problem in digital
cash)  
>  
> (2) Servers should not be able to forge transfers  
>  
> (3) Servers should not be able to block transfers to or from politically
incorrect parties.  
>  
> ...Using these results [of Byzantine quorum systems] it looks like we can
approach our ideal title database as follows:  
>  
> (1) Alice signs the title and Bob's public key, and sends this message to
2f+1 servers, committing her to transfer title to Bob. Bob checks at least
2f+1 servers before relying on Alice's transfer.  
>  
> (2) No collusion of servers can forge Alice's signature (we achieve at least
this property ideally!)  
>  
> (3) A conspiracy of >=(1/4)n servers can block a transfer. Alice's recourse
is to use some other channels to broadcast her intention, demonstrating that
the registry did not follow her wishes, and hoping the alternative channels
are more reliable. Bob only has similar recourse if he signed a document with
Alice demonstrating their intentions to transfer title from Alice to Bob. The
most basic recourse is a correct subset of servers which exits the property
club and establishes a new one, then advertises its correctness (and proves
the incorrectness of its rival group) as described above.

  
More here.

