The current debate over statutory restrictions on the uses of the writ of
habeas corpus should lead us to re-examine the foundations and context of that
prerogative writ. The only explicit mention of it in the U.S. Constitution is
in Art. I Sec. 9, as one of the restrictions on the powers of Congress:  
  

> "The Privilege of the Writ of Habeas Corpus shall not be suspended, unless
when in Cases of Rebellion or Invasion the public Safety may require it."  
>

From this language we may reasonable conclude two important principles:  

  1. Habeas corpus may only be suspended by an act of Congress (which raises the question of what is to be done if Congress and the courts cannot convene).
  2. Habeas corpus is presumed to be a right that precedes the Constitution and is incorporated by it, by restriction on when it may be suspended.  

But if the writ of habeas corpus precedes the Constitution and is incorporated
into it, does that make it one of the unenumerated rights of the Ninth
Amendment, and if so, what about the other prerogative writs that have a
similar status in common law, such as quo warranto, mandamus, prohibito,
procedendo, and certiorari? We don't hear much about these in current
jurisprudence, except the last, in discretionary appeals.  
  
I have argued in a paper in progress, "Presumption of Nonauthority and
Unenumerated Rights", at http://www.constitution.org/9ll/schol/pnur.htm , that
all of those writs, and more, are indeed among the unenumerated rights of the
Ninth Amendment, and that, contrary to current doctrine, these are not
creatures of statute but fundamental rights that may not be constitutionally
burdened. For evidence of this we can find among the proposed amendments from
the New York ratifying convention not just a declaration of the writs as
rights, but of a right to petition for the rights "in the name of the people",
that is, as private attorneys general. That we have the rights was taken for
granted. Only the standing of any person to petition for them was thought
necessary to be asserted in an amendment.  
  
Habeas corpus can be considered a subset of quo warranto. The former demands
an official prove his authority to detain a person, but the latter demands an
official, including a private official, prove his authority to do anything he
may be doing or threatening to do, including holding an office. The former
requires the official to produce the detainee in court. The latter requires
him to suspend his activity until proof is made.  
  
Was there ever a time, following the Declaration of Independence, which made
the people the sovereign, when any individual could go to court with a
petition for a writ of quo warranto and get an official activity suspended
until that official proved his authority? Yes, there was, in the early
republic, but so seriously did officials take the threat of such a writ that
they took great care not to exceed their authority, so that the remedy almost
never had to be carried forward, or precedents established. It should come as
no surprise that officials don't like the right and have done almost
everything they can to deny or deprecate it or make people forget about it.  
  
Perhaps it's time to change that.  
  
Most law schools don't teach much about the prerogative writs, not even habeas
corpus. It should come as no surprise that many lawyers and judges are unclear
on the concept or how it is supposed to work, if we followed the original
standard of due oprocess. Too many judges treat a petition as an ex parte
motion to show cause, with the burden on the petitioner. It is not. The writ
is not an order from the court to produce the prisoner and the proof. The
petition itself is the order to do that, much like a citation in a civil case,
to respond to the filed petition. the writ is the finding by the court of
whether the official has the authority, ordering release of the prisoner if he
does not.  
  
The only statutory component of habeas corpus, or the other writs, was a
prescription of how much time the official has to comply. Originally, that
ranged from three to twenty days, depending on the distance of the official
from the court.  
  
The question may arise, what happens if the court fails or refuses to hold a
hearing, or accepts the authority of the official without the proof? This
question is critical to an understanding of the role of courts in the Anglo-
American legal tradition. The answer, by original standards of due process, is
that the writ issues by default if the respondant fails to respond, or even if
the court fails to hold a hearing. If the judge accepts the official's claim
of authority without proof, then by those ancient standards, the judge himself
may be removed from his position by a writ of quo warranto. In 18th century
England this became a serious matter, and "peasants with torches and
pitchforks" burning down courthouses and hanging judges was something that
actually happened. If courts were derelict the people, as militia, took the
law into their own hands, enforcing writs that by common understanding issued
by default. But that process was not always so "due", and the line between
militia enforcing the law and an enraged mob was often crossed.  
  
We now live in an era of increasing tension between the judiciary and the
public. This is a matter that deserves our constructive attention, or history
could repeat itself.

