The most notorious feature of the U.S. patent system is the current test for
obviousness. On top of being "novel," patents are supposed to be "non-
obvious." The novelty test is relatively straightforward: nobody must have
previously described a device that has all the elements of the disputed patent
claim. Thus, if A+B, B, and C have already been made or described, then A+B+C
and B+C are novel but A+B is not.  
  
In order to not bother people with trivial combinations, patent law has longed
deemed that on top of novelty there be an "inventive step," which in the U.S.
now goes under the name of "non-obviousness." To the Supreme Court in the
1950s, this meant that a patent claim must demonstrate "the extraordinary
level of innovation, beyond the capabilities of a person having ordinary skill
in the art, that warrants the award of a patent." This expressed most
engineers' aspirations about what a true invention consists of, but it was
notoriously subjective, leading to arbitrary decisions by patent examiners and
courts. To create a more objective test, in the 1970's the Supreme Court held
that a new combination which did not change the respective functions of at
least some of the elements was obvious.  
  
Then Congress created the Federal Circuit and granted it a virtual monopoly
over patent appeals. The Federal Circuit proceeded to radically change patent
law in a variety of areas, usually in favor of the patent seeker or holder.
Until this most recent term, the Supreme Court has largely let it do so. But
now, first with _eBay _ and now with this obviousness case ( _KSR v. Teleflex_
), the Supreme Court is starting to rein it in.  
  
Among the law the Federal Circuit changed, it made the obviousness test far
more difficult for a patent examiner or alleged infringer to prove, but also
made the test far more objective and straightforward. To be obvious, according
to the Federal Circuit, there must be a teaching, suggestion, or motivation in
prior literature that would have led a person of ordinary skill in the art
(i.e. your typical engineer in the particular field) to have made the claimed
combination. For the purposes of this counterfactual test it is assumed that
this hypothetical engineer had all relevant prior art pasted on the walls of
his office. The teaching or suggestion doesn't have to be a full-fledged
description of a combination of the elements, as in novelty, but in practice
the infringer almost has had to prove a lack of novelty in order to prove a
lack of obviousness, rendering the obviousness test almost superfluous and
leading to the raft of trivial patents engineers complain of these days.  
  
I'm proud to say that the professors of two of the best patent classes I took
in law school are leading the charge to overturn the Federal Circuit's
obviousness test. John Duffy is co-counsel for the petitioner, KSR, which is
challenging the Federal Circuit law. Robert Brauneis is Counsel of Record for
the 24 Law Professors as friends of the Court who support reforming the
obviousness test. These are two very talented individuals and I predict a
splendid success.  
  
KSR in its brief argues that the Supreme Court's test(s) should be restored,
but it gives short shrift as to what specifically the test of obviousness
should be. If you have good idea(s) for what the test(s) for obviousness
should be, now is the time to let us know.  
  
Patently Obvious has more discussion of the issue and links to all the various
briefs.

