Nick Szabo's Papers and Concise Tutorials Copyright (c) 2005 by Nick Szabo  
(Some of the following previously appeared as a sidebar in Shelling Out -- The
Origins of Money and on the author's blog, Unenumerated).

Abstract: _A variety of vague cultural explanations have been proposed for the
unique Melanesian trading instituion, the _kula_ ring. Landa[L94] proposed an
explanation based on credit risk and gossip. This working paper provides a
rigorous explanation based on the author 's theory of collectibles and
specific cycles of circulation as detailed in Shelling Out -- The Origins of
Money and using minimal trust assumptions. _

Just off the cost of New Guinea, Melanesians evolved (over thousands, and
perhaps even tens of thousands, of years) a unique commercial institution
known as the "kula ring" for the collectibles that circulated within it. The
unforgeably scarce kula collectibles doubled as "high power" money and
mnemonic for stories and gossip. Many of the goods traded, mostly agricultural
products, were available in different seasons, and so could not be traded in
kind. Kula collectibles solved this double-coincidence problem as an
unforgeabaly costly, wearable (for security), and circulated (literally!)
money. Necklaces circulated clockwise, and armshells counter-clockwise, in a
very regular pattern. By solving the double-coincidence problem an armshell or
necklace would prove more valuable than its cost after only a few trades, but
could circulate for decades. Gossip and stories about prior owners of the
collectibles may have provided information about upstream credit and liquidity
[L94]. In other Neolithic cultures collectibles, usually shells, circulated in
a less regular pattern but had similar purposes and attributes.

Why do the kula collectibles circulate in a specific cycle? Why does the cycle
traverse the ring of islands? And why are there not just one but two
counterrotating cycles? The author for the first time (as far as the author is
aware) provides a rigorous answer to these puzzles.

The proximate reasons why two kinds of collectibles circulated in opposite
directions were transaction norms and religious taboos shared by the traders.
The ultimate reasons (i.e. functional reasons why the institution evolved this
way) may be explained as follows:

Collectibles often literally circulated in specific cycles that avoid sinks.
This amortized the cost of the collectible across more trades. Why? The
function of collectibles is to lower transaction costs such as non-coincidence
of needs or events. A transaction network uses collectibles more efficiently
if it increases the ratio of velocity to current value. Since velocity was
very low and the value of transactions (trades, marriages, inheritences, etc.)
could be high, this was a big problem in neolithic transaction networks. Some
collectibles had a velocity of once per generation, i.e. they were just family
heirlooms!

The network uses collectibles more efficiently with more members, so we'd
expect the circulation to expand beyond bilateral cycles into cycles around
the entire regular transaction chain.

Now that we've explained why a collectible cycle would be expected to arise in
the first place, on to the key puzzle: why to counter-rotating collectible
cycles rather than a single cycle around the island chain?

We can model the kula ring abstractly as a cyclical island chain of N islands,
such that each island trades only with its immediate neighbors. These islands
vary in their volume of trade. This can be model in the limit as N-1 islands
of normal trade and an Nth island that trades nothing (other than, possibly,
collectibles).

For illustration, take N=5. We thus have island chain  ABCDE, where boats can
travel no farther than their neighbors and island C is self-sufficient (or
just very small) and doesn't want to trade goods regularly, but AB, DE, and EA
trade regularly. C breaks the collectible cycle (greatly decreasing the
efficiecy of collectibles for the other islands) unless it acts as a conduit.
Simply taking collectibles from D and shipping them to B (and pocketing some
profit of course) to complete a one-collectible cycle requires acts of faith.
With two opposite circulating collectibles, C simply engages in bilateral
trades with both B and D to complete both cycles. Thus, two counter-rotating
cycles allow for full circulation with minimal trust assumptions.

### References

[1] Landa, Janet, _Trust, Ethnicity, and Identity: Beyond the New
Institutional Economics of Ethnic Trading Networks, Contract Law, and Gift-
Exchange_ , The University of Michigan Press, second edition, 1998.

Comments and criticisms to  
Nick Szabo's Papers and Concise Tutorials

