 _Semayne's Case,_ an opinion of the English King's Bench in 1604, is a very
important case expressing the long-standing "knock and announce" rule when law
enforcement searches a residence. This rule was formally recognized to be an
important part of the U.S. Fourth Amendment in _Wilson v. Arkansas_ (U.S.
1995). I've posted the entire opinion online and linked to it below.
_Semayne's Case_ is where the popular phrase "a man's home is his castle"
comes from, but there's a lot more to it than that.  
  
I was going to write a blog post about the interesting conflict that is going
to arise between no-knock searches (which, despite _Wilson,_ are increasingly
being conducted by increasingly militant and culturally distant law
enforcement) and the recent "stand your ground" statutes in at least ten U.S.
states and at least one European jurisdiction. Several other American and
European states are discussing such legislation. These statutes generally
provide a full defense to murder if the victim is an illegal entrant into an
occupied residence (or even in some states an occupied car), or in some states
if the occupant reasonably believes that deadly force is necessary to prevent
the commission of a forcible felony within the house, including common
burglary.  
  
It turns out I don't need to say much, because Sir Edward Coke has already
done it for me in _Semayne's Case._ The special expectation of safety within
and right to defend a residence and its occupants -- what Coke called the
"liberty ... of a house" -- justifies both a kill-the-burglar rule for
residents and a knock-and-announce rule for law enforcement.  
  
So forget the exclusion of evidence in such a search (per _Hudson v.
Michigan_) -- there is now in at least a few states a much stronger incentive
for police to behave with respect for household safety and security. Police
need to enter a house legally, including announcing themselves per _Semayne's
Case_ and _Wilson v. Arkansas,_ or they are, I argue, legally and m.orally put
in jeopardy of their lives in a "stand your ground" state.  
  
It's important to observe that Coke speaks of the "liberty ... of a house" and
the of thhue of whether the house is "a liberty." In Coke's time "liberty" was
a synonym for a franchise -- a privately held jurisdiction. Indeed, the kill-
the-burglar rule is a weaker version of _infangthief,_ the franchise right to
hang a thief caught red-handed on one's own land. _Infangthief_ and other
liberties were special property rights that had to be granted by one's lord
and ultimately by the king, or alternatively by prescription (i.e. long-
standing use that creates ownership under property law). Per Coke, liberty of
the house automatically attaches to any occupied residence as an inalienable
prescriptive right. It provides more protection against execution of process
in a private lawsuit than against execution of process for for a criminal case
(here referred to as process for the King). In either case, the official must
knock and announce. The highly evolved procedural law of franchises is central
to Coke's opinion. Coke analogizes the liberty of a house to a weak form of
liberty where the king's writs run but where private officials execute them,
i.e. a liberty "with return of writs." Coke notes that, while the owner of
such a liberty (or an official of it, called here a bailiff) normally has
authority to use force against trespassers, this does not give the liberty
owner authority to use force against legally executed process where the
liberty owner himself is a defendant: "a liberty is always for the benefit of
a stranger to the action" not for the defendant. Thus, when process is
performed legally against a resident, it can be executed forcefully into and
within a residence despite liberty of the house which otherwise allows the
resident a full lethal defense against forceful intrusion. To allow the
resident to distinguish the two cases is one of the main reasons for the
knock-and-announce rule.  
  
Under some of the new "stand your ground" laws the modern equivalent of Coke's
liberty of the house now attaches to your car as well, so that you can legally
defend yourself against carjackers with deadly force.  
  
My thanks to Professor Renee Lettow Lerner for her insights on stand-your-
ground statutes and legal history generally.  
  
Without further ado, _Semayne's Case._

