Alrenous, you're right, there have to have been simpler stages of evolution,
the most primitive archaea or bacteria are far too complex to have just
spontaneously formed even once in the universe. Just how much luck is required
is an open question, because we are just now starting to get a handle on what
those stages might of been (e.g. the speculative reconstruction 1-10 above is
the best I've ever seen, but it is still speculative, and still quite
incomplete, especially in step 5).  
  
A very indirect estimate may be had by observing the lack of ETI (lack of
artificial surfaces) in our galaxy or others that I have discussed. This
touches on George's point -- it may well be that non-photosynthetic life is
common and the Great Filter between the origin of life and civilization exists
but occurs very early, with life almost always stopping short of tapping solar
power. If the geological process of serpentization occurs underneath places
like Europa and Enceladus, leading to widespread alkaline vents interfacing
with acidic oceans, then primitive life may be common and more advanced life
rare. The trouble with this theory is that, while these moons are likely far
more common than habitable early-Earth-like planets, with the same
serpentization process, the latter are still probably common enough for
photosynthetic life to have arisen millions of times in our own galaxy alone
if little luck was involved. Even broken down as in 1-10 above, there still
seems to me a vast amount of luck required to get to life, enough to make it
extremely rare but not universally impossible. The odds may be 1^-100 instead
of 1^-1000 per trial, and there were more than 1^100 trials available with
second-generation "metallic" stars, but far less than 1^1000. There is still a
great deal of handwaving (and most of Alrenous' 1^-1000 odds) in step 5 above.  
  
A separate line of inquiry, "RNA world", has started to break down step 5
above into separate steps, but that work is still tentative and very little of
it has yet been recreated in a laboratory, although I expect that eventually
it will be. The biggest thing the new theory does is provide an ongoing and
direct energy source to drive RNA world (by the direct formation of ATP or its
more primitive forerunners). It probably makes RNA world quite a bit simpler
-- nearly all the enzymes for forming lipids, and for tapping indirect
chemical or photosynthetic energy sources, are no longer required, just a
membrane with a proton gradient across it, an ATP synthase enzyme, and some
RNA (and surely many details I'm leaving out, but the point is that DNA and
the insanely complex modern metabolisms aren't required to get evolution
going). And after all we are here, and so is and was archaea and bacteria, so
biogenesis can't be completely impossible. We are just starting to get a
handle on this, and I think the proton gradient membrane theory is a great
step forward in our understanding.

