Leonard, if there was such a thing as a competitive market for security, lower
security costs would straightforwardly translate to lower taxes/rents. It
certainly makes such lowering possible and more likely than if security costs
are high, which I suspect is what I vaguely had in mind when I wrote that. But
instead of a free market there was a hierarchy of rent-collectors, and
figuring out how much of the security cost savings they'd pass on to their
largely immobile farm tenants, rather than spending on luxuries (e.g. extra
domestic servants) and rent-seeking is a subtle matter, which I've by no means
at this point mastered. Albeit, since a central part of my thesis is
increasing mobility, perhaps another benefit of mobility is that the serfs and
peasants became not quite so immobile after all and rents relative to farm
profits declined after all. It's well known that rents rose substantially, due
to inflation (conquistadors with their well characterized flood of gold and
silver) and (less well characterized) per-acre productivity increases, but the
question is whether farm profits were rising faster than rents, allowing more
to be plowed back (so to speak!) into capital investments, and how the
difference between (before-rent) profits and rent compared to other countries.
Alas, while we have good numbers for rents, we don't have good stats for farm
profits. Albeit more important than physical mobility would have been
alienability, i.e. the freedom to move from one farm to another. Interestingly
enough, leases were getting shorter term by the 16th century, so that's
definitely worth exploring.  
  
J. Thomas, fertilizer was indeed a big deal (my article on the nitrogen crisis
was a warmup :-) Also soil conditioners like lime that reduced the acidity of
the soil, making uptake of these nutrients easier and greatly reducing
aluminum poisoning. And better nitrogen fixing plants. Which meant more
fodder, which meant more horses, which then hauled more lime and pumped out
deeper coal mines and lifted and hauled more coal to more places, which burned
lime into a powdered form that could de-acidify the soil. All working together
in virtuous (positive feedback) cycles to push Britain's isocline far
northeast long before the recognized "industrial revolution" or the most
popular dating for the "agricultural revolution." Call it the Agricultural
Evolution.

