The spate of anti-phishing bills currently making their way into or through
legislative bodies around the world provide a good opportunity to do something
that is long overdue -- amend our obsolete and destructive cybercrime
statutes. If network security professionals are to be empowered to stop
phishing and prevent cyberterrorism, a major overhaul to these statutes is
crucial.  
  
The Cuthbert case in the U.K. has provided yet another example of an unjust
conviction under cybercrime statutes. These statutes were typically enacted
before the advent of the Web and generally make "unauthorized access" to a
computer a crime. Under these statutes, the Web equivalent of pushing on the
door of a grocery store to see if it's still open has been made a crime. These
vague and overly broad statutes put security professionals and other curious
web users at risk. We depend on network security professionals to protect us
from cyberterrorism, phishing, and many other on-line threats. These statutes,
as currently worded and applied, threaten them with career ruin for carrying
out their jobs. Cuthbert was convicted for attempting to determine whether a
web site that looked like British Telecom's payment site was actually a
phishing site, by adding just the characters "../.." to the BT site's URL. If
we are to defeat phishing and prevent cyberterrorism, we need more curious and
public-spirited people like Cuthbert.  
  
Meanwhile, these statutes generally require "knowledge" that the access was
"unauthorized." It is thus crucial for your future liberty and career that, if
you suspect that you are suspected of any sort of "unauthorized access," take
advantage of your Miranda (hopefully you have some similar right if you are
overseas) right to remain silent. This is a very sad thing to have to
recommend to network security professionals, because the world loses a great
deal of security when security professionals can no longer speak frankly to
law-enforcement authorities. But until the law is fixed you are a complete
idiot if you flap your lips. Since almost any online activity of which, it
turns out, the web site operator does not approve may be deemed to be
"unauthorized," these cases revolve around whether the defendant "knew" that
the act was "unauthorized." In Cuthbert's case, because he told the police
that his purpose had been to test the public site's access controls (the
equivalent of pushing on doors of a grocery store to see if it is open) to see
if he had just given his credit card number to a phishing site -- a laudable
act of due diligence in this age of phishing and identity theft -- he
essentially admitted to the difficult knowledge element of the criminal
statute. After that, the conviction was a slam dunk.  
  
Several years ago, network security professional Randall Schwartz engaged in a
traditional friendly competition with security professionals in another
company to try to find holes in their security. That company turned out to be
not so friendly and Schwartz was convicted under an Oregon statute similar to
the one that felled Cuthbert. The court rejected  a defense of
unconstitutional vaguenessbecause, said the court, it sounded more like a
defense of overbreadth. In fact these statutes are both vague and overbroad,
but courts often do not understand the issues involved.  
  
Orin Kerr (a professor at my law school) has written a good paper on the
subject with respect to laws in the United States.  
  
Kerr recommends using more specific language instead of "unauthorized access."
My own recommendation is that, if we are going to keep the "unauthorized
access" language, it at least should be amended along the following lines:  
  
(1) an access should not be defined as "unauthorized" unless either the
defendant was provided notice of lack of authorization (equivalent to a no-
trespassing sign) and affordance (a barrier that requires some intentional act
to pass, equivalent to a fence or a door), or there is a long-standing and
widely-known custom that the kind of access as perceived by the defendant was
unauthorized, or both, and  
(2) there should be no crime unless there was an underlying intent to use the
unauthorized access to commit another kind of crime (such as theft of data,
trespassing via disruption of computer operation, etc.)  
  
Under (1), "unauthorized access" would for the first time have a clear
definition, similar to how "trespassing" is defined in the context of a public
place (you are authorized to enter a public store when it is opened, to push
on the door to see if the store is open, to shop, in some jurisdictions to use
the restroom unless there is a sign to the contrary; but you are not to enter
the back room where they have the safe). Security professionals would operate
under the same rules as everybody else instead of having knowledge
discriminatorily imputed to them because they are "supposed to know better."  
  
Under (2), accesses done for laudable purposes, such as Cuthbert's
investigation about whether his credit card had been phished, would no longer
be considered criminal. Network security professionals would be freed to do
their jobs and protect the Internet from real criminals.  
  
The current spate of anti-phishing bills currently making their way into or
through legislative bodies around the world provide a good opportunity to
amend cybercrime statutes -- to bring them into the twenty-first century world
of the public web.

