DN: "The usual analogy of proponents of inbound border controls that while it
is not okay to lock people up in our apartment, it is perfectly okay not to
let anyone in is fundamentally flawed. When a consulate arbitrarily denies
visa to someone with an invitation or, worse yet, a border-guard denies entry
to someone with a visa, they act like a condo janitor preventing your guests
from entering the condo."  
  
Although I strongly agree with the observation that a country that keeps its
people in (a la the old Iron Curtain) is far worse than a country that keeps
people out, you make a very good point here that is worth extensive
consideration.  
  
If I live in a bad neighborhood it is quite nice to have good locks and a
doorman who keeps out the riffraff. (In fact I speak from personal experience
here). I have to trust the doorman and apartment management with much of my
security. But, as you say, the doorman should respect and trust my preferences
when I invite in guests.  
  
Besides locking in vs. locking out, I'd add another important distinction --
who controls the locks. Ideally, I or my fellow family members control the
locks on our house and we can (and often do) lock other people out. At the
opposite end of the freedom spectrum is a prison where somebody else controls
the locks and locks me in. So the basic distinction between locking in and out
is indeed a sound and crucial one and is closely related to the issue of who
controls the locks and how they, in turn, are controlled.  
  
There are, however, a couple problems scaling these examples up. At a somewhat
larger scale, I have to trust a condo association or a gated community. Often
that is OK because our interests are aligned and they operate in a market
where exit costs are low enough that they don't want to get a reputation for
locking their residents in. But when we scale up to the state, or the federal,
things get far more problematic. A lock or guard or fence or airport security
check that usefully keeps out the terrorists and other riffraff today can
become a Berlin Wall to keep people in tommorrow, with minimal technological
change. Such devices require severe and religiously followed legal
protections, which are being ignored in the mad rush to keep out terrorists
and various other undesirables.  
  
DN: "There is a fundamental (IMHO) freedom which I miss very much from
international relationships: **the right to invite.** I see no valid
justification for denying the right to assume responsibility for a foreigner
and have said foreigner as a guest."  
  
This is a very good idea, but what about the responsibility part? Are you
willing to post a substantial bond?  
  
If I invite somebody into the apartment complex and they trash the place, that
could very well violate my lease terms, or simply result in my lease not being
renewed. Also, it is a local enough situation that it is easy for them to
figure out which renter is responsible for the vile guest. But if stranger X
from unknown neighborhood Y invites unknown foreigner Z into the country, how
are the border guards supposed to know to trust either the invitor or the
invitee?  
  
There is also the problem that if the person is a competent adult you have no
right to control him, so that it would be hard to impute to you legal
responsibility for his acts under the common law (although I may just be
unaware of precedent off the top of my head -- any reader feel free to chime
in with any analogical legal precedents you know of). It seems to require some
sort of special statute, contract, or both, which makes it an interesting
experiment to try but not something that we can just force on the entire
border system overnight or be certain that it will eventually work.

