Mitchell, the idea that _any_ of Robin's Great Filter, even the tiniest
fraction of a percent, lies ahead of us stems from a prime example of
Bayesiology. It's intuitively appealing, but pure fallacy, to suppose that in
a state of ignorance we deem more probable that we are somewhere in the middle
of a putative distribution rather that at in a different phase where the
distribution doesn't apply. To treat it all as one statistical distribution is
pure Bayesiological superstition. We must look to actual evidence in the real
world, not to Bayesiological "reasoning" about the the Drake Equation, to
determine the likelihood of existential threats and other Drake factors.  
  
Several of the Drake factors are almost pure speculation, so that nothing
useful can be derived _from_ calculating that equation. There's no significant
information to indicate that _any_ of the Great Filter lies ahead of us, and
much to indicate that it lies behind us.  
  
We can observe much about existential risk, the probability of various stages
of life, and so on and we must focus on those realities to make headway. Your
comment about "a sample of size 1", when we have vast complex biological and
human histories to look to, suggests a basic approach that is Bayesiological
rather than empirical.  
  
My estimate of >1 billion years comes from long thinking about real threats
that have been purported to be existential (nuclear war, plague, nanotech, AI,
and so on) and the (generally quite poor) reasoning that goes into such
claims. Very consistently the existential threats of these things have been
grossly exaggerated by popular culture, throwing popular intuitions very far
off the mark. Instead of handwaving, why don't you actually propose an
existential threat and let's analyze it?  
  
My estimate also comes from some basic reasoning about technological
possibilities -- for example, the high probability of space colonization some
time in the next 500 years, so that there is cosmologically only the tiniest
slit of a window where we wield extensive technological power with all of us
trapped with it on a single planet. Now, to understand this obviously requires
far more than waving around intuitively plausible probabilities like some
Bayesiologist, it requires that one must do some extensive thinking about
space colonization, which I've done (I'm happy to supply links).  
  
Finally, our lack of observation of any artificial surfaces in the universe
also gives a decent estimate of what the _answer_ to the Drake Equation should
be, namely very small (probably much less than 1 civilization per galaxy).
That is far more accurate than trying to calculate the answer to the Drake
equation, because so many of the factors, such as the probability of the
origin of life, the probability of going through various phases in the
evolution of life, and so on are so highly uncertain.  
  
I'd also point out that your theories don't help SETI or METI/CETI much: if
civilizations have such short lifetimes, or short windows in which we detect
their radio, then the probability that they exist and can communicate at the
same time as us is correspondingly lowered. (Another possible implication of
short window where we can detect them is that they are trying to hide -- which
strongly suggests that not learning from them and hiding ourselves, but rather
using METI etc. to "shout to the cosmos", could as David Brin argues be
extremely dangerous. In which case METI deserves far more condemnation than
just being laughed at).

