A new era of commercial gigaprojects is upon us, and the source is almost
entirely our insatiable demand for hydrocarbons. Despite high political risks,
global warming and "peak oil" fears, and shortages of skilled employees, there
are dozens of energy-related projects in the works or on the drawing boards in
the multi-billion dollar range, with several topping $10 billion. Is it the
sign of a petroleum bubble, or does it simply reflect the new reality of a
long-term higher worldwide demand for hydrocarbons? Here are some of the more
interesting projects. Note that the dollar cost of these projects is often a
bit higher than quoted here because of depreciation of the dollar versus most
currencies since the cost quotes in my sources were made.  
  
One of the biggest expansions into relatively new territory is that of tar
sands. It is estimated that over $100 billion will be invested in Canadian tar
sands projects over the next decade. Two of these projects are Petro-Canada's
Fort Hills Project($25 billion) and the Chinese/Canadian Northern Lights
Project ($4.5 billion).  
  
Many of the biggest projects are to extract natural gas (methane). $11 billion
of investment was recently completed for Qatargas II, and China is cooperating
with Iran on the $16 billion project to develop the Iranian North Pars field.
Woodside Corp.'s $9 billion investment in the Pluto project is expected to
eventually top out at over $30 billion. Sakhalin 2 is a $20 billion project of
Shell and Gazprom to extract oil and gas from beneath the coast of Sakhalin
Island, along the east coast of Russia.  
  
Oil tends to be a bit more dispersed than natural gas, and consequently
inidividual oil projects tend to be smaller. But in total, OPEC countries have
projects underway or plans for $254 billion worth of oil field development and
expansion. The largest projects tend to be pipelines: a proposed pipeline from
Siberia to China and the Sea of Japan for $12-$16 billion, Malaysia wants to
build a $7 billion pipeline to save oil tankers from the troubles and risks of
sailing through the Straits of Malacca, and a $4 billion pipeline is being
built between Chad and Cameroon. But other oil-related gigaprojects are in the
works. Kuwait is planning a $14 billion monster oil refinery. CONOOC and Shell
have agreed to build a $4.3 billion plastics (ethylene and propylene) factory
in Guandong Province, China. Investors have ponied up more than $1 billion
simply to search for oil in New Zealan's Great South Basin. And oil revenues
have allowed Saudi Arabians to dream of building a city from scratch for a
cool $26 billion. But topping our list of gigaprojects, the overall cost of
developing the Kashagan fields in Kazakhistan is now estimated at $136
billion, which may make it economically unviable.  
  
Meanwhile, there are also numerous offshore oil operations being developed in
the $500 million - $2 billion range, with a few such projects (such as the
Hebron field off Newfoundland, $5.6 billion) surpassing that range. More on
deep sea projects -- now including not just oil, but diamonds and other
minerals -- here.

