 _Work that yields too little money/food for subsistence cannot be done_  
  
This is a good point, but I think you also answered it, namely gains from
specialization. The soil of a region might not be sufficient to grow a mix of
food sufficient to live off of, yet it might be sufficient to grow exportable
goods which can be traded for sufficiently nutritional foods. I admit to
having a tough time coming up with examples, though, as the issues are subtle.
Livestock could already be driven long distances to market, so that doesn't
seem a good example. Albeit sheep for wool does, as wool was cheaper to
transport than grain but not nearly as cheap as driving livestock. But land
was also reclaimed for grain. The gains from specializing in that are either
much more subtle or requires another explanation. Your answer about more
dispersed plots may be it. Langton mentions commuting from village to farm as
an advantage of a horse in his pathbreaking book on the English transition
from ox to horse, but doesn't relate it to reclamation. To your answers I'd
add gains from transporting inputs _to_ the farm: e.g. liming and manure.  
  
Your excursion on tropical birds is fascinating and not at all irrelevant. My
interpretation is that these birds have a typical (far southwest) isocline for
non-human animals. They have a far smaller population than their available
food might support, so they live at the extreme top of the isocline. Which
should be typical for species that have a high parasite load or predator load
or (as with human hunter-gatherers) high intraspecific violence. If the
parasite load disappeared I'd expect these tropical birds to evolve by sliding
down the isocline, that is achieving a higher population destiny but losing
the strong immune systems and wonderful plumes.  
  
The British were different because they radically moved the isocline itself:
in the space of a few centuries they greatly increased their population
without a substantial decline the per capita productivity of food production,
and in the final phase radically increased the per capita productivity of food
production as well.  
  
Incidentally, I've browsed Richard Wrangham's new book on cooking and homo
erectus. The basic theory is that the discovery of fire and cooking allowed
our homo erectus ancestors to grow bigger brains by allowing us to more easily
digest a wider variety of foods. It allowed our ancestors to both decrease the
size of their jaws, teeth, and digestive system (replacing them with bigger
brains) and eat better diets and/or grow their population. I hypothesize that
cooking was actually a substantial move northeast in the Malthusian isocline,
allowing us to "predigest" food in ways other animals are not capable of. But
not without animal analogs, e.g. the extra stomach of ruminants allowing them
to "predigest" grass. And indeed, the high population densities of many
ruminants suggest that they actually have rather northeasterly isoclines. In
the case of American bison for example probably even more advanced than
erectus or human hunter-gatherers.  
  
Incidentally, I'm not sure if Wrangham deals with this, but I'd add that fire
and tool use are synergistic -- rocks can be used to grind or pound food down
to a certain point where cooking becomes most effective in predigesting it.
Which could explain why no other animals (e.g. birds which regularly
manipulate tinder) ever evolved to predigest food with fire.

