  
  
Paul Krugman (via Brad Delong) bemoans the corruption that has become
commonplace here in D.C. and sees it as an effect of growing income
inequality:  
  

> Both history and modern experience tell us that highly unequal societies
also tend to be highly corrupt. There's an arrow of causation that runs from
diverging income trends to Jack Abramoff and the K Street project.

George Reisman (via Chris Engelsma) has explanation for the flat wages:  
  

> The last forty years or so have seen the imposition of environmental
legislation and consumer product safety legislation, and numerous other
government programs that serve to increase the costs of production. The great
majority of people assume that the higher costs simply come out of profits and
need not concern them. But the fact is that the general rate of profit in the
economic system remains more or less the same, with the result that increases
in costs show up as increases in prices, or as decreases in other costs,
notably, wages. The real wages of the average American are stagnating in large
part because the higher real wages he could have had...have instead been used
to pay for the cost of environmental and safety regulations.

Krugman is definitely on to something, but he's got the causation backwards.
Public choice theory predicts that the rich have disproportionate lobbying
clout because they have more concentrated interests. If there is a big
motivation for lobbying -- namely the growing impact of federal taxes and
regulations and income redistribution on all of us over the decades within
which inequality has climbed -- the rich will do a disproportionate amount of
that lobbying and will get an even more disproportionate benefit from it.  
  
The result is today's K Street. The generic semi-skyscrapers of K Street --
all required by law to be shorter than the Washington Monument -- are the true
capital buildings of the United States, the capitals of corruption, just a few
blocks away from where I'm typing this. It's the street under which I catch
the subway home. It is in those stunted skyscrapers, rather than in the
symbolic domed capital you see on TV, that most of our country's laws and
regulations are in fact drafted. The wealthy -- not to be confused, as Krugman
does, with those who happen to have a high income in a particular year -- have
a disproportionate clout on K Street. As a result, federal regulation
disproportionately impacts the non-wealthy, including those who are not
wealthy but are trying to earn enough income to become wealthy.  
  
Reisman correctly explains why real wages aren't rising: productivity is
barely keeping up with the unprecedented crush of government regulations and
spending over the last several decades. When we add the disproportionate
lobbying ability of the rich, who can thereby direct disproportionate costs of
taxes and regulations increasingly towards the middle classes and poor, the
great rise in government spending and regulation explains both flat wages and
growing inequality. To Reisman's observations on business regulations I'd add
the similarly strong and obvious but widely ignored connection between anti-
growth zoning and rising housing prices. Housing now eats up historically
extraordinary fractions of household income, and that is also a result of
predatory government regulation. Not coincidentally, anti-growth zoning also
benefits wealth (houses already built and owned) at the expense of income
(people who have an income but not a house, who can increasingly not afford to
buy a house near where the best income jobs are).  
  
Of course, another explanation for the supposed flat wages is that we don't
and can't really know whether they have been flat, or rising, or falling: the
measurements that go into computing inflation and "real" wages may be quite
subjective and inaccurate, for a variety of reasons. But that is a post for
another day.

