I've seen a ton of evidence for Byzantine caesaropapism but I'd love to hear
Larison's evidence to the contrary. The Byzantine emperor could and did
preside over doctrinal councils, require the patriarchs to prostrate
themselves to him, issue ecclesiastical edicts, call himself "Pontifex
Maximus" (a title used by both the head of the old pagan state religion and
the Pope), appoint and depose patriarchs, and so on. Byzantine icons depict
the emperor standing in a front of his subordinate patriarchs, indicating his
superior position, whereas Western Catholic icons generally depict pope and
emperor in equal positions. The Byzantine emperor was considered a "vicar of
Christ" (another term used by the Western Pope) and even more loftily a
"mimesis of Christ" (an imitation of Christ on earth).  
  
Larison is accurate to call the Protestant state churches caesaropapist, but
IMHO no moreso than Byzantium's, and soon done under by the plethora of
Protestant sects, which in Byzantium were generally persecuted out of
existence (the main exception being the Monophysites who were too large to
persecute). The Byzantine empire started out with its own plethora of
Christianities (Manichaen, Nestorian, Coptic, Arian, etc. etc.) and ended up
after a few centuries of persecutions with just two (Orthodox and
Monophysite). In contrast Puritans, Quakers, Methodists, Unitarians, and many
other nonconformists grew and thrived around the relaxed spiritual rule of the
King-headed Church of England. I understand of course why Catholics have a big
beef against the Church of England, but that doesn't make it more
caesaropapist than Byzantium.  
  
I agree with Larison's point that his interlocutor is abusing the term
"caesaropapist", but it's hardly due to the uselessness of the term.
Caesaropapism is a word utterly essential as the name for a historically very
real phenomenon (the strong influence of many important secular rulers over
religion) and proposing we stop using it is tantamount to proposing that we
forget about important parts of history.  
  
The term also applies, BTW, to most rulers of major civilizations before
Byzantium -- the pagan Roman emperors, and before them the Egyptian pharaohs,
ancient kings of Sumer and Assyria, and many others. Again, these were usually
heads of religion as well as heads of state, a very different thing from the
Western Catholic model of religion not controlled by the secular ruler (indeed
the very idea of a purely secular ruler), and I'd think that Catholics of all
people would want to preserve that distinction.

