There are two big problems with extending commodity based money to consumers:
(1) the mental transaction cost problem of trying to keep track of prices and
transactions in multiple currencies, and (2) legal barriers: not just legal
tender laws and harassment from regulators (a la e-gold), but assumptions in
various commercial law codes (especially the UCC) that "money", meaning
government-issued money, is by definition used in a "sale." And if it's not a
"sale", you can get dumped into strange and often untested legal categories.  
  
I've long thought about the possibility of consumer derivatives. Indeed this
gets back to my first thoughts on smart contracts -- one of my big
inspirations were derivatives and the synthetic assets one can construct from
them:  
  
"Another area that might be considered in smart contract terms is synthetic
assets. These new [in 1994] securities are formed by combining securities
(such as bonds) and derivatives (options and futures) in a wide variety of
ways. Very complex term structures for payments (ie, what payments get made
when, the rate of interest, etc.) can now be built into standardized contracts
and traded with low transaction costs, due to computerized analysis of these
complex term structures. Synthetic assets allow us to arbitrage the different
term structures desired by different customers, and they allow us to construct
contracts that mimic other contracts, minus certain liabilities. As an example
of the latter, synthetic assets have been constructed that mimic the returns
of stocks in German companies, without requiring payment of the tax foreigners
must pay to the German government for capital gains in German stocks. It's
important to note that these synthetics do _not_ confer voting rights as do
the originals. It might be possible to add smart contract protocols to
transfer voting rights to the synthetic. Of course, these protocols might have
to be quite secure to withstand attacks from the third party jurisdiction,
whose transaction cost (the tax) is being arbitraged away by the synthetic
asset."  
  
With consumer derivatives, consumers might conduct transactions like "big
money" does as described above: a legal "sale" using government money in one
contract, and one or more derivatives to hedge the risks created by using the
government money on the side.  
  
If the consumer is not to be overwhelmed by the added mental transaction costs
of multiple currencies and derivatives, something like what I call a market
translator, a.k.a. contract compiler, is needed to make these complex
transactions "under the covers" in a way that the consumer need not worry
about, i.e. in a way that doesn't add substantial mental transaction costs.
The idea is that if we can reduce the mental transaction costs of using
multiple currencies to reasonable levels, we can probably also reduce those
costs for using derivatives. Indeed it's possible that arbitrarily small and
complex transactions can take place "under the covers" as long as they reflect
user preferences with reasonable accuracy and are communicated to the user by
a trustworthy and reasonably accurate, even if of necessity highly simplified,
metaphor.  
  
To put it another way, the idea is to take the software "big money" uses and
put it into a consumer's budget and shopping software, so that similar
sophisticated hedges can be made under the covers when government money is
used to pay for web hosting or to recharge cell phones, or when commodity
currencies unfamiliar to the consumer (and different from the denomination
used in the consumer's budget software, tax forms, etc.) are used to pay for
these things.

