Daniel: _Maintaining a vessel for the sole purpose of being able to leave
whenever I want is a huge opportunity cost (there are many better things to do
with that same vessel)._  
  
You may be right, but you may also be wrong for at least the following
reasons:  
  
(1) Low exit costs can be quite valuable, when one adds up savings on taxes,
regulatory burden, etc. when politicians can't take advantage of high exit
costs. If the total tax+regulatory burden on a seastead will be only half that
on land, for thousands of people this savings may be in the millions of
dollars per year, and for millions of people it is easily tens of thousands of
dollars per year.  
  
(2) Low exit costs need not be the only reason to live on the ocean. Already
thousands of people live for months at a time on the ocean in the offshore oil
industry. There may be cost savings (quite aside from jurisdictional arbitrage
considerations) from having some of these people live full time on site.  
  
The business of offshore jurisdictional arbitrage is quite real. For decades
in Europe, many cruise ships were essentially duty-free shopping malls (I'm
not sure to what extent this has continued under the EU).  
  
In your favor, the intersection between (1) and (2) is probably very small
(offshore oil workers will save only thousands, not millions, on taxes) and
for the vast majority of people the lack of suitable employment and the social
isolation of living very far away from most friends and relatives would be too
high. (I doubt very many software engineers like Gramlich and Friedman and
most of their followers, for example, are actually willing to retrain
themselves and take a paycut to work as roustabouts, ROV operators, etc.)  
  
In any case, to the extent seasteading happens I expect it to happen through
decentralized efforts, starting with for example an offshore Internet server
on a yacht, or a small group of single oil workers deciding to live on the sea
full-time until they retire, and expanding from there, rather than through
grandiose schemes like the Seasteading Institute. I think that to the extent
that SI puts in perspective schemes that are far more ridiculous still (e.g.
the many libertarians who have bizarrely supported NASA on the theory that it
is going to substantially help bring about space colonization -- I have to
plead guilty to this idiocy myself in my younger days) it serves a good
purpose.  
  
If there are innovative ways to lower the costs of offshore real estate, the
oil industry has the high incentive and funding to make these breakthroughs.
These will be company towns, with high exit costs, which we already have
substantial experience with. Political experiments utilizing such technology
deviating from the company-town model will be smaller-scale follow-ons of such
big business efforts.

