There is currently a hot debate at Marginal Revolution and elsewhere over
Gregory Clark's new book, _A Farewell to Alms_. I can't do Clark justice with
a short explanation, but in brief he posits that the rich outbred the poor so
quickly in medieval England that a eugenic effect occurred, giving the English
traits of temperament such as harder work, longer time preferences, etc. that
made the industrial revolution possible. I find the political incorrectness of
Clark's explanation refreshing, but I'm not convinced, given that the rich
tended to outbreed the poor during most eras and in most cultures of history
prior to the industrial revolution. Even worse, Clark's theory can't explain
why England fell behind most of the rest of Western Europe, and later most of
the rest of the industrial world, in industrial and later economic progress
after about 1870. Genetic change doesn't work nearly that fast.  
  
I've argued that the printing press, combined with a free market in books and
the resulting spread of literate culture and the rise of national languages,
gave Europe an institutional superiority over other cultures of that era that
is now hard to fathom. As the term "literate culture" does not connote the
radical shift in our very thought processes that occurred, I call this effect
"book consciousness."  
  
This led, in the first instance, to Western European conquest of the world's
seas and colonization all over the planet -- a conquest that has been
substantially reversed and could not be duplicated today because now most of
the world shares book consciousness. It also led to a radical change in the
way work skills were taught to children, which along with the scientific
revolution and other fruits of the printing press led to the industrial
revolution.  
  
Clark's own data on wages and productivity can best be explained, I believe,
by the radical changes in child investment strategy reflected in Protestant
Reformation and a central aspect of book consciousness.  
  
Finally, the industrial revolution occurred first in England rather than other
parts of Western Europe due to the security advantages of being an island. Not
at all coincidentally, England was by 1800 the leading colonial power. England
was protected at low cost by its navies from most of the organized violence
that ravaged the continent. This allowed it to develop a more secure regime of
property rights, which in turn lowered the risks of the large capital outlays
needed for industrialization. For a similar reason Japan initially outpaced
its continental Asian rivals in industrialization.  
  
Here's a link to the debate at Marginal Revolution.

