Two of the most important characteristics of legal procedure are local
coercion and nondeterminism. I've written plenty about coercion recently, so
here I'll put forward some thoughts about its nondeterminism.  
  
A deterministic process is one in which, for any state of the world -- a state
being a theoretical description of everything that might change the future --
there is only one next state. The omniscient Laplace's daemon could in
principle predict everything about the future if the universe were
deterministic. In a nondeterministic process, there can be more than one
future state, and not even Laplace's daemon can know for sure, and may not
know at all, which one will happen. We can model simple processes as "state
machines": in the present the process is in one state, in the next instant in
the future the process may have transitioned to another state, and so on.  
  
Here's a picture of a deterministic process -- one with only one possible
future:  
  
  

  
Here's a picture of a nondeterministic process:  
  
  

  

  

  
  
If as in the picture above there are more than two possible future states,
this can also be modeled as a sequence of binary events:  
  
  

  

  
  
An event can be natural or a human act. If it's a human act, the decision to
act often can or should be based on good estimates of in which state(s) the
world is or was in. In legal procedure, generally an arrest should only be
made based on an estimate that the person arrested in fact committed a
specific crime, for example.  
  
If causally related nondeterministic processes repeat themselves often enough,
we can develop a probabilistic model of them. Physicists have developed
probability density models for very small-scale phenomena in quantum
mechanics, for example.  
  
Practical nondeterminism stems from at least four sources: (1) some of the
physical world is inherently nondeterministic, (2) even where deterministic in
principle, the configuration of physical states in the world is vastly more
complex than we can completely describe -- nobody and no computer comes
anywhere close to resembling Laplace's demon, (3) people are far, far more
complex than we can mutually comprehend -- especially if you get more than a
Dunbar number of us together, and (4) the words and phrases we communicate
with are often ambiguous.  
  
Most of the nondeterminism in legal procedure stems from questions of who did
what when and where, and the legal consequences that should ensue based on
codes and judicial opinions written in ambiguous language. Law summarizes this
uncertainty with a number of qualitative probabilities often called "burdens
of proof". The following list is sort of, but not necessarily (as they come
from different legal domains and are not necessarily comparable), in order of
lesser to greater burden of proof:  

  

  * Colorability  

  * Air of Reality  

  * Reasonable suspicion  

  * Prima facie case  

  * Probable cause  

  * Preponderance of the evidence  

  * Clear and convincing evidence  

  * Beyond reasonable doubt  

  * (To reverse a jury verdict) No reasonable jury could have reached the verdict  

  
These label the probabilities -- not in the sense of numbers between 0 and 1,
but in the sense of kinds of evidence and degrees of convincing argument --
required for various decisions of legal procedure to be made: for a search
warrant to issue, for an arrest to be made, for property to be confiscated,
for a legal motion to be accepted or denied, for liability to accrue in a
civil trial, for a sentence of guilty in a criminal trial, for decisions about
jurisdiction, and so on.  
  
It's useful to look at these, not merely as classical probabilities, but in
the style of quantum physics, as a superposition of states. When a
nondeterministic event -- or a deterministic event for which we lack important
knowledge -- has happened in the past, we can treat it as a superposition of
all the possible events that might have happened. When a person or persons
undertakes a procedural act -- arrests a person, issues a verdict, and so on
-- under law they should be doing so based on a judgment, to some degree of
certainty, that one particular set of facts occurred that justify the act. We
can thus see a criminal defendant, for example, as in the state "guilty or not
guilty" until a jury "collapses" this probability distribution to a verdict
(which collapse, however, unlike quantum mechanics, can sometimes be reversed
by an appeals court if deemed erroneous). A suspect is in the state "beyond
reasonable suspicion" or "not beyond reasonable suspicion" until a police
officer acts, for example to pull over your car on the highway, in a way that
requires reasonable suspicion. In principle, at least, this decision too shoul
dbe reversible (for example, if the officer pulled over your car without
reasonable suspicion and noticed an open beer bottle, that evidence could be
thrown out of court based on the lack of reasonable suspicion in the original
stop).  
  
Legal procedure needs to control nondeterminism so that people can operate in
an environment of reasonably reliable legal rights. Think, for example, about
how inefficient the economy would be if most property was in imminent danger
of being taken from one owner and given to another due to frequent decisions
reversing old court cases, or how full of worry our lives would be if we could
be taken off the street and put in jail at random. Thus there is, for example,
a strong presumption in English-law countries that a jury's decision is final:
and this effected by putting the burden of proof on the court reversing the
decision high: "no reasonable jury could have reached the verdict", a burden
of proof in a criminal case much higher than the jury's own "beyond reasonable
doubt."

