anonymous, you are probably referring to the attempt by European national
governments, practically bankrupt after WWI, to return to the gold standard,
often at pre-WWI levels, while they and others tried to pay the interest on
the debts (and Germany tried to pay its war reparations) with the deflated
currency. The problem here was not the gold standard, it was war debts beyond
the ability of taxpayers to pay (causing governments to go off gold during WWI
and later causing taxation higher than the Laffer maximum, which _lowered_ tax
revenues and made the situation even worse) and a massive _deflation_ that
Britain for example felt was needed to get back to the pre-WWI standard.  
  
The U.S. Federal Reserve colluded with Britain in this regard, causing
destructive deflation in the U.S. At the time of the October stock market
crash, the real Fed funds rate was an extraordinary 14%: 6% + an 8% deflation
rate. Today, the real rate is probably negative. The Fed itself seems to be
subject to great mood swings.  
  
The extreme debts wracked up during the war, the war inflation, and the
subsequent forced deflation were all big mistakes. Using inflation during the
war as a hidden tax had already destroyed the integrity of the gold standard.
It was too late to return to the pre-war exchange rate of pounds for gold --
they should have chosen a new exchange rate reflecting the inflation. Both the
war inflation and the subsequent forced deflation seriously screwed up price
signals and wreaked havoc on debt contracts.  
  
Along with the extreme deflation caused by attempting to reverse the entire
massive war inflation, it was Germany, Austria, Britain and a bunch of other
countries defaulting on their debts, coming _off_ the gold standard (a de
facto default), or both,and the resulting massive gold flow into the U.S., and
the idiocy of the Federal Reserve to sterilize this flow to maintain the
deflation, that turned a recession into the Great Depression. There were also
massive tax hikes in the U.S., Hoover using his Big Stick to promote wage
stickiness which caused excess layoffs, Hoover and then FDR throwing up
barriers to markets in farm produce, and other problems that also helped cause
and prolong the Depression. To pin it on the gold standard itself is a red
herring: civilization had been using gold for thousands of years without a
Great Depression.

