I've written generally on the problem of measuring value. Civilization has
progressed when we've discovered how to use better, but often quite non-
obvious, proxy measures of value. One important kind of value measurement
problem is estimating the inflation or deflation of a currency. The most
popular estimate is a consumer price index (CPI) using weighted indexes of
prices of a basket of goods and services. The CPI in turn is used to compute
adjustments for inflation-indexed securities and pension schemes and"real"
values for things like GDP, productivity, and so on. Richard Vermillion at
Quicksilver Sulfide has a good post on the limitations of weighted price
indexes for such purposes.  
  
I agree wholeheartedly that incomparability is a big problem for the CPI. I
conclude that the CPI, and thus indexed investments and pensions and various
"real" estimates of GDP and productivity are heavily error-prone and bias-
prone. It is doubtful, however, that these problems "systematically make[] us
overestimate inflation." Some other proxy measures of inflation suggest the
opposite is the case.  
  
If one may generalize, technological progress over the last five years has
increased value and decreased prices faster than other factors (e.g. rising
regulations, rising money supply, and other political problems) have increased
them in arguably luxury or zero-sum areas like entertainment and office
bureaucracy (e.g. the oft cited rapidly falling costs and increased
capabilities computers and associated products). But political factors have
(to various degrees depending on your unit of measure) increased prices faster
than rising technological productivity in traditional necessity areas such as
food, housing, and energy. Furthermore, the problems Vermillion points out
with choosing units of measurement (gallons of gas or miles driven?) are
multiplied or exponentiated when it comes to comparing the value of gadgets
that play music or movies or allow us to spiel on the Internet.  
  
What is a luxury and what is a necessity is itself quite debatable, and most
categories are part luxury and part necessity. Prices of underlying real
estate are mostly necessity (we need to be within commuting distance of our
jobs), but the prices of houses themselves (especially after the big increases
in square footage) are increasingly luxury. I take a long view and a global
view, under which agriculture and its inputs (over the last century including
oil) has been the dominantly important industry for about ten millenia and is
still a crucial industry. Just because water is far cheaper than diamonds, or
flour is cheaper than cable TV, to such an extent that we can spend more on
the latter than the former, doesn't mean water should be (or in fact
subjectively is) weighed far less than diamonds or bread less than a month's
subscription to cable. Even though Americans probably spend more on cable TV
than on food calories (or at least more than we could spend if we didn't
insist on ingredients and recipes and modes of delivery until recently
considered luxuries), there would be far more suffering if the price of food
calories went up by a factor of ten than if the price of cable TV did so.
People once found and will find other ways to entertain themselves without
cable, but we can't do without calories. (Many of us Americans would be
healthier with a few less calories, but that goes for cable TV too).  
  
There is a vast amount of interconnection between the different factors. Fuel
mileage and thus the productivity of a mile of commuting may be up, but urban
and suburban real estate prices and the associated commute distances probably
have more than offset this factor in the ten years (not to mention value lost
from extra time spent commuting instead of more enjoyable or productive
activities).  
  
We could just leap over these variously biased and error-prone indexes if we
could observe how people value a dollar tomorrow versus a dollar today -- time
preferences. Although there are other influences on time preferences, I
hypothesize that the dominant influence on time preferences overall for users
of a currency is the expectation of inflation in that currency. Even if we
can't accurately measure an overall rate of inflation, due to the problems
Vermillion describes, we may be able to find a good proxy measure for it if we
can find a good proxy measure for the overall time preference of currency
users that doesn't involve first computing a "real" rate of interest.  
  
People sense price rises in the things they value, and thus come to their own
estimates of past inflation, i.e. rises in the costs of their own budget due
to external causes, and expectations of future inflation in the prices of
things they value. I argue that this subjective inflation, and the expectation
of future subjective inflation, are what a money issuer really ought to
target: the issuer should observe proxy measures that most closely approximate
overall subjective inflation expectation, and expectations of same, and expand
or contract the money supply, via discount rates or otherwise, accordingly.  
  
For the purposes of estimating subjective inflation, I don't think interest
rates work as a proxy measure. Here's why, giving as an example today's U.S.
dollar interest rates. If dollar inflation is lower than the CPI indicates, as
Vermillion argues, then real interest rates are positive, showing that folks
prefer to spend a dollar on todays's technologically inferior and more pricier
goods over a dollar on tommorrow's superior and less expensive goods. But if
consumers have such "Luddite" or risk averse commodity preferences, then
inflation may be much higher than Vermillion or the CPI suggest, meaning real
interest rates aren't really positive. Using interest rates as an indicator of
time preferences introduces a circularity when arguing for or against such
preferences for the purposes of properly weighing a basket of goods.  
  
Another problem of using interest rates as a proxy measure for inflation
expectations is that it is biased by investor behavior and in particular
foreign inflows or outflows of dollars. If there is a larger dollar supply in
the world returning home to the U.S. and chasing fewer investment
opportunities, that will drive down interest rates despite subjective
inflation expectations. If the economy using dollars is shrinking (either
because the economy itself is shrinking or because some other currency is
gaining favor, supplanting the use of dollars) and the dollar supply fails to
shrink along with it, the result is both inflation and low interest rates.  
  
A better measure of consumer time preferences, and thus per the argument above
consumer inflation expectations, may be to look at savings rates. Savings
rates here in the U.S. strongly suggest that people aren't saving up to buy
computers or audio or video players two years from now because these gadgets
will be very important to us and more functional and cheaper than today.
Rather, increasingly U.S. consumer budgets are going into goods and services
that have been rising much faster than the CPI, especially housing and
education. The negative savings rate strongly suggests, as do the price
trajectories of the most objectively comparable goods (commodities and
housing), that the CPI has for the last five years been understating
inflation, and that interest rates in the U.S. are too low compared to this
inflation to induce Americans at least to save here. (Foreigners are investing
vast sums here, but that's another story). If Americans have been spending as
if their dollars will be worth less tomorrow than today, perhaps we should
respect that perception, technological progress in entertainment and office
bureaucracy notwithstanding.  
  
The correlation between time preferences observed in U.S. consumer savings
rates and a "consumer price index" far more heavily weighted towards
necessities than today's CPI suggests either that (a) goods on the luxury end
where productivity has been increasing tend to be "zero sum" status goods, or
entertainment goods that only temporarily make us happier, so that the
productivity increases won't actually make us much happier in the future, and
thus don't effect much our time preferences compared to "positive sum" and
"we'd be far less happy without them" necessities, or (b) that time
preferences are very risk averse, and thus strongly weigh future water over
future diamonds, despite our spending more on the latter in the present, or
(c) a combination of both these factors. In both cases there are rational
arguments to make for such preferences and in any case we should respect them
and choose the units and weights of our price indexes consistent with them.  
  
Another reason to believe the U.S. CPI, at least, underestimates inflation is
the intuitive argument that the organization that created the formula for the
CPI (i.e. the federal government) is also the organization that stands to pay
out vastly greater sums on i-bonds, Social Security, and so on should the
inflation rates it reports go up. Even small biases in reporting inflation
today lower the federal government's future liabilities by vast sums. It is
also hard to recognize and correct any bias, since due to incomparability CPI
units and weights could be debated ad infinitum. There is a wide lattitude of
government choice among CPI weights and measures that cannot be proven to be
right or wrong. Why would they not choose the values that best meet their
budget preferences? However, to make this argument correctly one should invoke
public choice or similiar theory rather than treating government as if it has
the incentives of an individual; such an analysis is beyond the scope of this
post.  
  
Whether or not we can find other proxy measures for inflation, Vermillion's
basic point about incomparability and the dubious nature of the units and
weights used in price indexes is correct. Unless there is a good substitute
proxy measure for subjective time preferences and thus subjective inflation,
(perhaps the savings rate as suggested above), we are stuck with weighted
indexes. But measures based on these weighted indexes, including measuring the
"real" values of GDP or of particular sectors or goods, measuring "inflation,"
and measuring "productivity" -- all these suffer from the incomparability of
the goods and services in the index, and thus are much more error-prone, much
more bias-prone, and indeed, much more prone to badly incentivized
manipulation and fraudulent accounting than the usual economic pundits and
advisors have been assuming.

