I come up with far more ideas than I have time to properly evaluate, much less
pursue. Long ago I worked at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and I still
occasionally daydream about space stuff. Recently there have been several
proposals for shading the earth from the sun, put forth to combat global
warming. I've been noodling on my own sunshade idea for several years. For
your entertainment (and who knows, it might also turn out to be quite useful)
here it is:  
  
Put a bunch of Venetian blinds at a spot permanently between the earth and the
sun (know to orbital engineers as the first earth-sun Lagrange point, a.k.a.
"L1"). These blinds would be refractive rather than reflective to minimize the
stationkeeping needed to prevent being "blown" away by the pressure of
sunlight. At L1 they only need to refract the light by less than one degree of
angle for the light to miss the earth. Less than 2% of sunlight needs to be
deflected away from earth to offset the expected global warming from
"greenhouse gases," primarily carbon dioxide.  
  
Venetian blinds, unlike this proposal, and this one, can be opened or closed
to allow continued control over the amount of sunlight hitting earth. This is
essential since we can't really predict with great accuracy the degrees of
global warming that we will need to combat. The blinds I propose, rather than
being a number of joined slats as in a normal Venetian blind, are simply a
large number of separate satellites each with a refractive slat that can be
manuevered to any angle with the sun (i.e. from fully "closed" vertical to
fully "open" horizontal).  
  
I propose that the blinds be placed precisely at the region where they will
deflect primarily light headed for equatorial regions on earth. That will even
out temperatures a bit between northern and equatorial latitudes and reduce
the energy (caused by temperature differences) available for storm formation,
and thus probably the intensity of storms (although the effect, like the
effect of global warming itself, on storms may be negligible). But the blinds
should be maneuverable enough, by using solar electric propulsion or "sailing"
on sunlight pressure, to redeploy to deflect sunlight headed to extreme
latitudes if polar ice sheet melting becomes a larger problem than equatorial
heat.  
  
Instead of launching these vast (or vast number of) panels from the very deep
gravity well of earth or manufacturing them on the moon (which probably lacks
the proper organic ingredients and even sufficient water, a crucial industrial
input), we can extract the raw materials from any near-earth asteroids
containing water and methane ice or, if there are none such, from Jupiter-
family comets. Besides the proper raw materials being available in sufficient
volume in such ice, but probably not on the moon, there are a number of other
advantages to microgravity ice mining explained in that linked article. If
extracting material from comets and manufacturing the blinds can be automated
the entire vast project can be conducted by launching just a few dozen of
today's rockets using the recently-proven solar electric upper stages;
otherwise it will require manned missions similar to those recently proposed
to Mars, but again using solar-electric upper stages. (Solar electric rockets
are only required for the first trip; much lower cost solar-thermal ice
rockets can be used in subsequent trips, again as explained in that linked
article).  
  
Of course shades don't combat other effects of excess carbon dioxide such as
ocean acidification and faster and differential plant growth, but these
effects alone do not justify the vast costs of reducing carbon dioxide
emissions. Indeed faster plant growth is probably a major economic benefit.  
  
My off-the-cuff estimate of cost, which is probably as good as any recent NASA
estimate for any of their gigaprojects, is that the project would cost $10
billion per year over 50 years. That's for the manned version; if it could be
automated it would cost far less. This is far cheaper than other space-based
sunshade proposals because once initial capital costs are made and the first
two or three bootstrapping cycles have been undertaken, the ongoing transport
costs of material from comet to the earth-sun L1 point are extremely small.  
  
As a side benefit it would (unlike a mission to the moon or Mars or a "base"
or any similar project) develop infrastructure needed for large-scale space
industry and colonization. I propose funding the project, not with a tax, but
by treating the blinds like a carbon dioxide sink and auctioning extra carbon
dioxide credits for a global carbon dioxide market, since the shade allows us
to be far less drastic in reducing growth of carbon dioxide emissions. If
instead of a market we go with carbon taxes the project could be funded from
those. $10 billion per year is much lower than even the most optimistic
estimates (at 1% of world GDP about $500 billion per year) of the costs of
reducing carbon dioxide emissions. Furthermore, there are a variety of other
markets for large-scale industry that can be exploited once the basic ice
mining infrastructure is developed: space tourism and making manned missions
and other transportation around the solar system vastly less expensive, for
starters, as well as providing propellant, tankage, and industrial raw
materials in earth orbits. As I stated in 1994:  

> If the output of the icemaking equipment is high, even 10% of the original
mass [returned to earth orbit by rockets using water propellant extracted from
the comet ice] can be orders of magnitude cheaper than launching stuff from
Earth. This allows bootstrapping: the cheap ice can be used to propel more
equipment out to the comets, which can return more ice to Earth orbit, etc.
Today the cost of propellant in Clarke [geosynchronous] orbit, the most
important commercial orbit, is fifty thousand dollars per kilogram. The first
native ice mission might reduce this to a hundred dollars, and to a few cents
after two or three bootstrapping cycles.

The savings for transporting materials to the earth-sun L1 point, instead of
launching them from earth, are even larger.

