The United States Constitution is often lauded as the epitome of freedom. And
indeed, the U.S. has for most of its history sat far towards the "more free"
end of the spectrum of actual governments. The original Colonies, Articles of
Confederation, and the first hundred years of the United States Constitution
were, with some glaring exceptions, among the most libertarian of governments
in human history, and far more libertarian than the modern United States. The
actual text of our Constitution, read straightfowardly under standard English
definitions, or read as most lawyers read it when enacted, is (with the
exception of the Sixteenth Amendment, the income tax) a fringe libertarian
document. Of all the 2008 Presidential primary candidates only the libertarian
Ron Paul could credibly base his platform on the actual text and original
meaning of the Constitution. The positions of all the other major candidates,
as well as the interpretations of most of our Supreme Court justices, depart
very far from the actual text in its original meaning.  
  
But our Constitution is nevertheless deeply flawed. In a number of ways it
facilitates our slow slide into socialism and tyranny. It is rather easy for
Congressmen, Presidents, and federal justices who wish to interpret it as
granting broad powers and narrow rights to do so, and they have been doing so
ever since the Constitution was enacted. A wide variety of other
constitutional mechanisms and institutions would do a far better job at
slowing and reversing the death of liberty in the modern world.  
  
Much of the early liberty of the American Colonies and the early United States
was, as Adam Smith observed, due to low exit costs. Farming was the dominant
economic activity, and the availability of free land out West made it
relatively easy for a farmer to move if the local conditions got too
oppressive. Officials had to preserve liberty to keep their populations.
Nevertheless, our Constitution among other factors kept the U.S. more
libertarian than Russia, which also had a large frontier. Our Constitution
slowed, but did not stop, the aggrandizement of power into effectively
unaccountable and increasingly oppresive forms. While there are many more ways
to make it worse than to make it better, and this author does not recommend
constitutional convention or military coup, those trying to set up new
constitutions, or amend their old ones, should observe that there are a number
of crucially important ways in which the U.S. Constitution can be improved
upon.  
  
Speaking very broadly, the general problem with our Constitution is that it
allows the rise of a fully sovereign and monolithic federal power. Such an
entity inevitably aggrandizes its power and ultimately cannot make credible
commitments to protect property or any other rights or powers that it covets
for itself. This is a common flaw of modern constitutions, but there are a
number of protective mechanisms which these constitutions do not employ, or
employ incorrectly, that could be brought to bear to correct this general
problem.  
  
A bit more specifically, here are most of the major flaws in the U.S.
Constitution:  
  
(1) The legislative branch is too powerful: several of the grants of power in
Article I are too broadly worded and the rules for interpreting them are
insufficiently strict. Once legislatures have achieved broad powers, they can
hardly be expected to vote to give those powers up. It's a one-way ratchet
towards socialism and tyranny.  
  
(2) The executive branch is too powerful: executive duties are not well
defined and the non-delegation doctrine is not enforced, allowing the rise of
permanent unelected lawmaking bureaucracies. (In many practical ways the real
constitution the post-New Deal U.S. operates under is the Administrative
Procedures Act, augmented by things like Chevron deference).  
  
(3) There is far too much use of elections and far too little use of
lotteries. A number of officials should be chosen by lottery (as in ancient
Athens) or by a sequential election/lottery cycle (as in the Venetian
Republic). Lotteries can be very good at solving public choice problems, such
as the problem of concentrated lobbying during elections which trump widely
distributed preference.  
  
(4) One of the two gravest defects lies in how courts are structured with
respect to the constitutions they interpret. A basic design pattern for good
government is that officials should not be interpreters of their own power.
Allowing federal courts to interpret federal powers and state courts to
interpret state powers has led to inevitable aggrandizement of the powers of
both: to broad interpretations of power-granting clauses. Vague constitutional
language, which is practically inevitable, would not lead to tyranny if the
judiciaries who have final say interpreting these clauses did not have
incentives to expand these powers. This effect is exacerbated by allowing the
legislature and executive to choose the judges. I am afraid that, for example,
Professor Barnett's proposal for convincing federal courts to (in many ways
return to) libertarian interpretations of our Constitution, desirable as such
interpretions are, is nevertheless futile. Incentives operate to select judges
who profess broad interpretations of power, and while sitting on the court for
judges to further aggrandize governmental power. Our judicial structure is
another one-way ratchet towards tyranny.  
  
A much better (but hardly the only better) proposal for selecting judges:
select judges for lower courts by lottery from among lawyers who have scored
in the upper percentile on the state bar exam and have been practicing for at
least 5 years. Select judges for higher courts by a lottery over the judges of
lower courts who have at least five years experience on the bench. Judges can
still be impeached and removed for by legislatures or independent tribunals
for egregious illegal behavior, but the executive and legislature play no role
in selecting judges in the first place. This makes the judiciary far more
independent of the executive and legislative branches.  
  
The basic structure of courts in the American colonies was far better than our
structure under the Constitution. There, the Privy Council, not colonial
courts, had the final say in interpreting colonial charters. Being more
dependent on Parliament and the Crown than on the colonial legislature, it had
no incentive to aggrandize the power of the colonial legislatures. There were
also a number of flaws in colonial government, including deep flaws in the
British constitution that allowed the rise of Parliamentary sovereignty, which
both compromised the independence of the Privy Council and trespassed on
colonial legislative powers. There was also the practical problem of distance
that made appeals to the Privy Council in London far too infrequent. But the
basic appeals structure was far superior to that of our current Constitution.
The colonial court structure will work far better now without the delay
problem and if the highest court is not itself tied to a legislature.  
  
(5) The other of the two gravest defects is the lack of unbundled political
property rights.  Federalism and separation of functions are two very good,
indeed crucial, features of the Constitution, but they are insufficient for
protecting liberty. Unbundled rights to engage in narrow forms of coercive
legal procedure are often a far better way to distribute power than
hierarchical federalism and separation of powers in an entity that is supposed
to be in totality sovereign. The gothi of medieval Iceland, often cited by
anarcho-capitalists, were an example of a political property right. Medieval
and Renaissance England was a world full of polycentric, or highly
distributed, political property rights, but these were swallowed up by
legislative powers in colonial America. We must revive this very important and
legally mature method of distributing political powers. Many legislative,
executive, and judicial functions should be granted to private entities as
political property rights, with the jurisdictional boundaries and procedural
standards defined in those rights to be enforced by an extraordinary court
independent of all other governmental entities.  
  
(6) Insufficient protection is given to, and scope allowed for, choice-of-
forum and choice-of-law clauses. Much, though by no means all, law could be
entered into by contractual agreement, allowing for healthy forms of legal
competition in certain areas, such as contract and family law.

