Anno Domini 193 is often called the Year of the Five Emperors after the five
that ruled as princeps ("first citizen") in all or major parts of the Roman
Empire: Pertinax, Didianus Julianus, Pescennius Niger, Clodius Albinus, and
Septimus Severus. Indeed, counting the Emperor Commodus, who died at the end
of 192, the Empire saw six emperors in the space of five months.  
  
The Roman imperial succession was supposed to proceed by adoption of the most
competent possible successor [3]. This followed the example of Julius Caesar's
adoption of Octavian as his heir, and Octavian's subsequent taking on the
title of princeps as Augustus Caesar. In practice, however, at least three
other factors often intervened: first, emperors tended to favor their natural
sons over their adopted ones; second, the Praetorian Guard, the emperor's
bodyguard, often exercised a life-or-death control over the succession; and
third, Roman legions were often motivated to intervene. Combining this rickety
system of succession with the awful power of the autocratic emperor, whose
"will was law", made successions an all-or-nothing, win-or-die struggle of
often devastating violence. The Year of the Five Emperors witnessed more than
its share of such violence. It gave rise to the Severan dynasty and more
importantly to its legal authorities, who are cited in courts of law today,
millenia after the emperors themselves have been forgotten. The Severan's
jurists also voiced political ideas that would echo down to our time, as we
shall see in future articles.  
  
Commodus, the incompetent and unpopular natural son and successor of Marcus
Aurelius, was poisoned by his mistress Marcia (not, I'm afraid to tell fans of
Gladiator, slain by Russell Crowe in the Colosseum). Apparently this
assassination was a plot that included the Praetorian prefect Laetus and the
urban prefect Pertinax. The urban prefect was something like the mayor of the
city of Rome: he supervised all the collegia (corporations and guilds) in the
city, supervised maintenance of its aqueducts and sewers, supervised the
import and doling of grain, supervised a force of police and night watchmen,
and other such administrative tasks. The Praetorian prefect was the head of
the emperor's bodyguard, the Praetorian Guard, which also (as here) often had
the power to make or break emperors.  
  
The Guard declared Pertinax emperor. After only three months in power, as the
great historian Cassius Dio reports, the Praetorians, unsatisfied with the
funds Pertinax had provided them and fearing persecution, turned against
Pertinax:

> But Laetus...proceeded to put out of the way many of the soldiers,
pretending that it was by the emperor's orders. The others, when they became
aware of it, feared that they, too, should perish, and made a disturbance; but
two hundred, bolder than their fellows, actually invaded the palace with drawn
swords. Pertinax had no warning of their approach until they were already up
on the hill; then his wife rushed in and informed him of what had happened. On
learning this he behaved in a manner that one will call noble, or senseless,
or whatever one pleases. For, even though he could in all probability have
killed his assailants,— as he had in the night-guard and the cavalry at hand
to protect him, and as there were also many people in the palace at the time,—
or might at least have concealed himself and made his escape to some place or
other, by closing the gates of the palace and the other intervening doors, he
nevertheless adopted neither of these courses. Instead, hoping to overawe them
by his appearance and to win them over by his words, he went to meet the
approaching band, which was already inside the palace; for no one of their
fellow-soldiers had barred the way, and the porters and other freedmen, so far
from making any door fast, had actually opened absolutely all the
entrances.[1]

The soldiers dispatched Pertinax and the Praetorians then decided to make
their pecuniary preferences far more clear before they chose the next emperor:

> Meanwhile Didius Julianus, at once an insatiate money-getter and a wanton
spendthrift, who was always eager for revolution and hence had been exiled by
Commodus to his native city of Mediolanum, now, when he heard of the death of
Pertinax, hastily made his way to the camp, and, standing at the gates of the
enclosure, made bids to the soldiers for the rule over the Romans. Then ensued
a most disgraceful business and one unworthy of Rome. For, just as if it had
been in some market or auction-room, both the City and its entire empire were
auctioned off. The sellers were the ones who had slain their emperor, and the
would-be buyers were Sulpicianus and Julianus, who vied to outbid each other,
one from the inside, the other from the outside. They gradually raised their
bids up to twenty thousand sesterces per soldier. Some of the soldiers would
carry word to Julianus, "Sulpicianus offers so much; how much more do you make
it?" And to Sulpicianus in turn, "Julianus promises so much; how much do you
raise him?" Sulpicianus would have won the day, being inside and being prefect
of the city and also the first to name the figure twenty thousand, had not
Julianus raised his bid no longer by a small amount but by five thousand at
one time, both shouting it in a loud voice and also indicating the amount with
his fingers. So the soldiers, captivated by this excessive bid and at the same
time fearing that Sulpicianus might avenge Pertinax (an idea that Julianus put
into their heads), received Julianus inside and declared him emperor.[1]

But this was politics, not voluntary commerce, and the military hierarchy of
the Roman legions proved to be mightier than the highest bidder. Three
governors (commanding several legions each), Albinus of Britain, Severus of
Pannonia (south-central Europe), and Niger of Syria, declared themselves
emperor, suspended forwarding of tax revenues to Rome, and started marching on
Rome to dethrone what they considered to be a corruptly selected emperor.
Severus got there first:

> Severus, after winning over everything in Europe except Byzantium, was
hastening against Rome. He did not venture outside the protection of arms, but
having selected his six hundred most valiant men, he passed his time day and
night in their midst; these did not once put off their breastplates until they
were in Rome.[1]

The security precautions of the Praetorians proved to be no match for Severus'
legions, and this was so obvious that the city and Praetorian rank-and-file
basically rebelled against Didianus Julianus and the Praetorian leaders and
turned the city and the emperorship over to Severus:

> Julianus, on learning of [Severus' approach to Rome], caused the senate to
declare Severus a public enemy, and proceeded to prepare against him. In the
suburbs he constructed a rampart, provided with gates, so that he might take
up a position out there and fight from that base. The city during these days
became nothing more nor less than a camp, in the enemy's country, as it were.
Great was the turmoil on the part of the various forces that were encamped and
drilling,— men, horses, and elephants,— and great, also, was the fear inspired
in the rest of the population by the armed troops, because the latter hated
them. Yet at times we would be overcome by laughter;he Pretorians did nothing
worthy of their name and of their promise, for they had learned to live
delicately; the sailors summoned from the fleet stationed at Misenum did not
even know how to drill; and the elephants found their towers burdensome and
would not even carry their drivers any longer, but threw them off, too. But
what caused us the greatest amusement was his fortifying of the palace with
latticed gates and strong doors. For, inasmuch as it seemed probable that the
soldiers would never have slain Pertinax so easily if the doors had been
securely locked, Julianus believed that in case of defeat he would be able to
shut himself up there and survive.  
>  
> But Severus presently reached Italy, and took possession of Ravenna without
striking a blow. Moreover, the men whom Julianus kept sending against him,
either to persuade him to turn back or to block his advance, were going over
the Severus' side; and the Pretorians, in whom Julianus reposed most
confidence, were becoming worn out by their constant toil and were becoming
greatly alarmed at the report of Severus' near approach. At this juncture
Julianus called us together and bade us appoint Severus to share his throne.
But the soldiers, convinced by letters of Severus that if they surrendered the
slayers of Pertinax and themselves kept the peace they would suffer no harm,
arrested the men who had killed Pertinax, and announced this fact to Silius
Messalla, who was then consul. The latter assembled us in the Athenaeum, so
named from the educational activities that were carried on in it, and informed
us of the soldiers' action. We thereupon sentenced Julianus to death, named
Severus emperor, and bestowed divine honours on Pertinax. And so it came about
that Julianus was slain as he was reclining in the palace itself; his only
words were, "But what evil have I done? Whom have I killed?" He had lived
sixty years, four months, and the same number of days, out of which he had
reigned sixty-six days.[1]

Severus "inflicted the death penalty" on the plotters against Pertinax and
"murdered" a number of Senators, after swearing a sacred oath not to harm any
Senators. (The quoted language is Cassius Dio's [2] in translation). So what
were Severus' homicides -- legal executions or illegal murders? This was
question of legal procedure. Under the old Republican legal tradition, still
nominally enforce but in practice long defunct where the emperor was
concerned, most of these killings would have been considered extrajudicial,
i.e. murders. As we shall see, under the laws codified under the Severan
dynasty, "the emperor's will was law" -- he by definition could never murder,
only execute, and his oaths were by definition not binding on his future self.  
  
Major civil war ensued as the Severan legions went up against those of Albinus
and Niger. The terrific battles included a spectacular siege of Byzantium --
later to become Constantnople, but already a mighty fortress strategically
placed within on the Bosporus, controlling the maritime traffic between the
Mediterranean and Black Seas. After four years of civil war between Roman
legions [3], Severus came out the winner. I will examine the reign of the
Severan dynasty, and in particular the effects of military structure of the
victorious legions on the political structure and legal procedures of Rome, in
subsequent posts.  
  
 **References**  
  
[1] and [2] Cassius Dio, Roman History, books [1] 74 and [2] 75.  
  
[3] Tony Honore, Ulpian, Oxford University Press (second edition 2002).

