spanker and Tom, thanks much.  
  
George: _another major problem with the Constitution is that it's almost all
procedural...future Supreme Court justices must promise they will claim the
Constitution says things it clearly does not, and this is generally regarded
as ok because proper procedure is followed._  
  
It's also regarded as OK because it's compatible with the incentives of all
the major players in the federal government: Congress, the President, the
agencies, and the justices themselves. The public regards it as OK because it
believes the federal press releases it gets via the mass media. We now live in
a world that habitually looks on the federal government as "the government",
with its legitiamte subject matter being any matter raised as a national
concern by the mass media, which politicians parrot.  
  
Article I Section 8 is supposed to be a scheme of enumerated substantive
powers, a finite set of powers beyond which Congress may not legislate, and
indeed the Supreme Court still declares that this is the case.  
  
You cite one of the three big loopholes in the scheme: the taxing power. I
think you mean legislating via discriminatory taxes (e.g. to effectively ban
stuff with very high taxes), tax credits, and the like. (There's also forcing
states to legislate via conditional block grants to states, which I cover
below).  
  
I don't know how the courts could set a revenue maximum, as budgetary needs
vary and are a core competence of legislatures, not judiciaries. It would give
the federal judiciary far too much power if it could veto taxes or budgets.
But perhaps a jury trial that cannot be appealed, except to another jury,
might work. A class action lawsuit by any taxpayers who object to a certain
tax rate. All based on a constitutional amendment that all taxes must be only
a "reasonable" fraction of the price or value of something. But then, you
might pull up a jury of anti-smoking people who find a 200% tax "reasonable."
So this hardly guarantees a solution to the problem. Perhaps the amendment
could be worded to require an economic analysis of a rate that gives maximum
revenue, beyond which the federal government may not go, and the trial would
consist of dueling economics professors arguing over what the maximum rate is.
(Effective bans produce far less than maximum revenue, per Laffer). Hardly
perfect, but might work much better than no limit at all.  
  
Quite related is the spending power. It's the most ancient legislative power.
Parliament, which originated as a group of rebellious feudal landlords (whose
collective rent revenue was far greater than the king's), used its ability to
bribe the king with tax revenues to usurp authority to make general laws in
the first place. Now states are being bribed by Congress with lucrative income
tax revenues to make certain laws otherwise beyond federal power, as you point
out.  
  
The other big loophole in Article I powers is the power to regulate
"interstate commerce." For many decades this just meant interstate water
navigation and implied a restriction on states to not regulate interstate
trade. Then federal commerce power was expanded by courts to cover the
regulation of interstate railroad fairs, then intrastate railroad fairs, then
to cattle yards that produce beef that will be shipped in interstate commerce.
Today it means anything that might event remotely effect interstate commerce,
such as growing medical marijuana in your backyard or wheat for your own
consumption (no, I'm not kidding, these are real Supreme Court cases: growing
stuff in your backyard is now "interstate commerce". Courts that can interpret
their own powers have no shame).  
  
The problem is that it's extremely difficult to make a list of substantive
powers that is so utterly precise in its meaning that judges with incentives
to expand the powers of themselves and their peers cannot come up with a
plausible argument for greatly expanding that meaning.  
  
In this case there may be an easier solution: a constitutional amendment that
prevents "conditional block grants to states or other governmental entities",
or similar. The feds would have to either grant the money to states or not,
based only on an objective formula not conditional in nature, and any
requirements on rulemaking or enforcement by that state would be forbidden
from the formula. I'd have to think about the wording, but it sounds like a
much easier task of drafting than trying to define "interstate commerce."  
  
I wonder, though, if Goedel incompleteness is homomorphic to the problem of
trying to draft loophole-free constitutions. :-)

