Daniel, I think your points on _respondeat superior_ on well taken, but I will
have to punt elaboration to a future time.  
  
On laches, I should point out that I greatly oversimplified it in my short
post (always a hazard when trying to summarize law) by equating it to statute
of limitations. One point of difference important for our political analogy is
that laches does not specify a fixed time. Statute of limitations do specify a
fix time, but there is often a lot of wiggle room.  
  
Laches is generally based on three loosely defined elements. Usually all three
elements must be satisfied, but one might also use them as factors to be
weighed in a balance: (1) Plaintiff knew or should have known that he had been
legally wronged, (2) plaintiff nevertheless delayed bringing a claim for an
unreasonable time, and (3) defendant was materially prejudiced by the delay.  
  
Material prejudice might occur from prejudice to the defedant's case (through
loss of evidence, witnesses, etc.) or from economic harm from the delay. First
example of the latter: defendant, believing a property is his, maintains or
improves property. Plaintiff, who believes and can prove the property was
stolen from him, lets the defendant incur these expenses and then files suit
for return of the property. Second example: dispute over employee stock
options; plaintiff waits until the options vest "in the money", then sues
claiming that the options were his and that he is entitled to all the gains
from them. Plaintiff allowing the defendant to incur the economic risk, then
suing upon success, is material prejudice to the defendant.  
  
On our political analogy, often simply being deprived of a specific property
or political right one has gotten used to thinking of as one's own and
enjoying, constitutes material prejudice. Also, the erorrs of interest rate
and inflation adjustments grow exponentially with time, and any such errors in
favor of the victims would cause material prejudice to the alleged wrongdoers.  
  
"Reasonable delay" is just place-filler that says one must go read the cases
and analogize to argue whether the delay in a given new case was "reasonable."
Time taken in negotiating with the defendant cannot be counted as part of the
unreasonable period.  
  
Under our political analogy to the return of stolen property or political
rights, or reparations, one could argue that if an aggrieved individual or
group has frequently agitated ever since the wrong occurred to redress the
wrong, then the amount of time considered reasonable should be much longer, as
long as they keep agitating. They have not the legal maxim goes "slept on
their rights." A related important idea is notice: the victims should
periodically renew their claims so that the alleged wrongdoers are always on
notice of their claim for reparations, or the return of stolen property, or
the like. OTOH a political claim that has never been heard by the alleged
wrongdoers until decades after the event is presumptively unreasonably.  
  
On adverse possession, it is considered a "legal" rather than "equitable"
doctrine and is thus covered in the U.S. at least by statutes of limitations
rather than laches.  
  
In summary, the main point of the laches analogy is to provide a set of
principles for rational political argument about how much delay is reasonable
for old claims for return of political rights, property, or payment of
reparations. It's not about setting specific time limits.

