Bryan Caplan has a great article on the irrationality of voters. (No, it's not
a commentary on the most recent American election, which was probably a
smidgen more rational than most, on balance). The basic idea, which I find
unimpeachable except in one area, is that voters are almost never foreseeably
impacted by their own votes. Single votes almost never change the outcome of
elections. Even if they did they would rarely impact the voter or others in a
way the voter clearly foresees. Given this disconnect between vote and
consequence, votes instead are based on how good they make the voter feel.
People vote in the first place, and then decide what to vote on, based almost
entirely on their emotional needs rather than on a rational analysis of the
kind that, for example, an engineer brings to designing software, an economist
brings to crafting monetary policy, a lawyer brings to drafting a contract, a
judge brings to interpreting law, or even that a boss or HR person brings to
hiring a new employee.  
  
I'd add that people use their political opinions to signal things they'd like
their acquaintances to believe about their personality. For example, people
support aid to the poor to signal to their friends and co-workers that they
are generous people, and thus good people to be friends or co-workers with.
The actual impact of any resulting policy on poor people or taxpayers or
others generally remains unobserved by friends and co-workers and thus is
irrelevant. Even if a friend believes the policy is mistaken, but that the
opiner's heart is in the right place, this is sufficient for successful
signaling. It's coming across as having a genuine desire to help the poor that
counts. Similarly, people are motivated to vote in order to signal their
altruistic participation in the community.  
  
The one area Caplan fails to explore is very small-scale elections. I've long
thought that juries, for example, are a much better example of democracy than
large-scale elections. Jurors are forced to take the time to learn the facts
(thus overcoming rational ignorance) and have a real case at hand (thus
overcoming much of the mismatch between social signaling to ignorant friends
and reality). They can clearly foresee the impact their verdict will have on
the defendant. While Caplan extols the virtues of judges and other experts
like himself (he'd like to have a Supreme Court of Economists to overturn bad
economic legislation), such a Platonic oligarchy of experts needs to be
checked and balanced by democracy. Juries, and the right of juries to judge
law as well as fact (and for lawyers to argue law as well as fact in front of
the jury), along with an unimpeachable right to trial by jury, are a much
better way than large-scale elections to check oligarchy.

