Methinks more careful reading may be in order. These _may be_ Pascal scams: I
am asking whether they are or not. I am asking whether there actually is or
was good evidence for them beyond arguments from authority, which tend to be
the most common arguments used to convince people that Pascal scams are true.
(e.g. "Hanson and Yudkowsky say there's an X% probability").  
  
#1. Yes, seriously. Thinking the last suprise is going to repeat itself is a
common fallacy. I am asking whether any of the authorities who predict this
actually have good evidence of it, evidence substantially stronger than that
of the rebuttal arguments. I'm asking whether slumping prices in some markets
are based on better evidence than mere pessimsim and fears stemming from the
last surprise.  
  
#2. Again, I am asking whether the authorities who predict such things
actually have good evidence for it.  
  
#6 There is no corresponding set of Internet companies that have made all or
even most of the bookstore's revenue from taking the business that the
bookstores have lost largely to free content on this Internet. Again it helps
to actually read what I said.  
  
What these have in common are beliefs about extreme conseqences _for wich I
have not heard_ any good underlying evidence, only arguments from authority
and the implied suggestion (sometimes even stated outright) that I should care
because the consequences would be so wonderful or so dire. I could of course
be wrong if in fact if the underlying evidence is substantially stronger than
the rebuttal evidence. But the general history of predictions of extreme
consequences, outside the hard sciences, is that they usually gather the
support of both authorities and those who believe authorities without in fact
having good underlying evidence. And the big events that actually occur are
generally the ones that the well-known authorities and their followsers were
not predicting -- only the lucky penny prophet who you never hear of until
after the event.

