A "liberty" (Latin _libertatis_ or freedom) in the king's courts of medieval
Europe usually referred something very different than it refers to now. It
referred to the right of someone to deprive some other people of some of their
normal rights as law-abiding subjects. In other words, it referred to a
political property, a specifically limited right to coerce some set of people,
usually for law enforcement or military or other political purposes. This
curious meaning, in some ways quite the opposite of our modern meaning,
reflects the conundrum that one person may use some freedoms to deprive
another person of their freedoms. To prevent this, these "positive" freedoms
to coerce can be limited to _procedural_ powers by which are enforced
_substantive_ laws that are generally non-coercive, i.e. that generally
protect only "negative" rights. English-derived common law (i.e. law in Great
Britain, the Commonwealth, the United States, etc.) since at least the
sixteenth century has generally accomplished this, and as we shall see it has
used the flexibility of vague phrases to evolve a variety of modern negative
rights.  
  
Medieval positive liberties that could be owned included the right of a lord
to hang thieves caught red-handed in his territory, the right to hold a market
and run a law-merchant court, to collect taxes for the king or for oneself, to
be a privateer (i.e. a pirate legitimized under the king's laws), to conquer
and run a foreign territory, and so on. There were many dozens of kinds of
these political properties specified in thousands of property deeds, called
charters. Charters often freely bundled real property (i.e. land) with a
variety of political properties over territories matching the boundaries of
the real property, but on occasion political properties could be unbundled
from land, and specific kinds of political property could be combined with
each other in a dizzying variety of ways. Political properties could be held
by individuals (as in lords of the manor, counties Palatine, the proprietary
American Colonies, and many other examples) or corporations (guilds, boroughs,
cities like London and York, companies like the East India Company, the
corporate American colonies, and so on).  
  
Individually owned politcal properties were generally hereditary. The king
exercised his own hereditary political property, called the Realm or the
Crown, from which at least in theory all other political property rights had
been originally granted. As the original grantor the king retained via his
courts jurisdiction over disputes involving those coercive properties, via the
extraordnary or prerogative writs. Most political property rights only
involved certain narrow subsets of the royal political powers, while some
(such as the county Palatine) were very broad, including all royal powers
within the boundaries of the county subject only to the intrusion of the
king's extraordinary writs.  
  
In the foreign relations context, in the granting of powers of naval warfare,
piracy, and colonization, political property was used for offense as much as
for defense. In the domestic context, justice was meted out by these privately
owned courts more often than injustice, but it should be observed that
breaking free of the jurisdiction of the local lord in order to come under the
jurisdiction of the king was, more than any other event, referred to as
gaining one's "freedom". If you were the subject of a lord as well as, mostly
indirectly, of the king, you were "unfree". If you were the subject of only
the king and his ministers, you were "free". At least that is how the king's
courts and ministers and any newspapermen that didn't want to be imprisoned
for libel by the king's courts referred to it.  
  
In their quest to usurp the political properties of the lords, boroughs,
cities, and guilds to run their local courts, the king's courts used cases
brought under the extraordinary writs to evolve a set of "liberties" with a
different meaning: liberties the way most of us think of them, negative
liberties that individuals held against these private law enforcers as
subjects of the king, and thus justified removal of the cases to the king's
courts. The definitions of various political properties increasingly included
the procedures within which those rights to coerce had to be exercsed in order
to protect the king's subjects from injustice. Thus we see, for example, over
the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries the king's courts successively stripping
guilds of various of their jurisdictional powers and thereby increasing the
liberty of the individual to freely engage in their trade. To try to be
consistent, the king's judges also often, though by no means always, respected
these negative liberties themselves in order to justify by rules their
usurpation of the positive liberties of rival private courts.  
  
Many of the basic constitutional rights of individuals, for example of the
rights enshrined in the U.S. Bill of Rights, descend from these efforts. The
_lex mercatoria_ evolved in the privately owned market courts of Western
Europe. Much of this merchant law was later incorporated into the common law
(the law of the king's courts) in Great Britain by merchant juries in the
century leading up to the industrial revolution. At the same time, the king's
courts gained a large degree of independence from both the king and the rising
power of Parliament, forming a separation of powers between the executive,
legislative, and judicial branches that was to be used as a model for the
United States Constitution.  
  
Lord Coke, Chief Justice of the king's court of Common Pleas under King James
I in the early seventeenth century, declared in _Dr. Bonham's Case_ that these
common law rights could even limit the power of Parliament, but this argument
came to be neglected by later courts. There has been longstanding debate over
whether this argument of Coke's was a legally binding "holding" necessary to
reach the verdict of the case or an unecessary "dictum" and thus not binding
precedent. A similar doctrine was, however, revived in the United States based
on interpreting broad statements in our Constitution such as "due process" in
terms of rights derived from English common law in order to limit the powers
of Congress and the President. The term "due process" comes from a series of
charters that followed the Great Charter (Magna Carta). The phrase was
considered largely synonymous with "the law of the land" that features in the
Magna Carta, and referred to procedural rights, including the rights of
political property and procedural limitations on those rights, that were
considred the "common law" at that time. However the United States' courts'
much later interpretation of the phrase has been far more creative and modern,
including the oxymoronic phrase "substantive due process" under which rights
to freedom of contract, school choice, birth control, and abortion, among
other such negative personal rights, have been unearthed and applied to limit
State and Federal legislative and executive powers. (More on the history of
due process here). The modern British Parliament, on the other hand, is
considered to have arbitrary sovereign powers, which can only be limited in
certain cases by interpreting the language of its statutes in narrow ways to
conform with the unwritten British constitution, i.e. its procedural common
law traditions, but again with many creative modern flourishes.  
  
In their efforts to limit locally coercive liberties by enhancing negative
liberties, the king's courts fell short of consistency in some important ways.
For example, a liberty of a corporation to enforce its regulations about a
given subject matter (e.g. medicine, for a medical guild) in a given territory
was often stripped from that corporation in a case involving a dispute between
an individual and that corporation (e.g. somebody practicing medicine in the
territory without permission of the guild), on the theory that "one should not
be a judge in his own case." This is a very sound principle, and in the case
of the guilds it led to the rise of free trade, but as the corporate
barristers were quick to point out, the king's courts often did not apply this
principle to themselves -- cases involving the king, which were many, remained
in the king's courts. To some extent this was achieved by the independence of
the king's courts, but it did not prevent these courts from gradually usurping
the political property of the private courts and other privately held legal
institutions and, with the generous help of Parliament and its own will to
power, eventually extirpating them.  
  
There is a detailed analysis of many English cases involving privately owned
rights to hold courts and enforce laws, including _Dr. Bonham's Case_ , in my
paper Jurisdiction as Property. __

