george weinberg: _I'm not convinced that money is a natural monopoly. Even if
everyone used the same denomination of money in a region (say, money is
measured in ounces of silver) it's quite possible that people would accept
coins from multiple mints just as they accept checks from multiple banks._  
  
One can simply observe the history of coins to see that governments have
generally come to dominate coin issue. I estimate, and challenge anybody to
prove me wrong, that over 99% of the coins found in archaeological sites,
since the very beginning of coin history, were minted by an entity closely
associated with dominant tax collectors. You have to explain how your modern
minter can avoid this fate, without invoking improbably libertarian
governments.  
  
Coins used directly as money are now silly. Even before e-commerce coins were
considered too bulky and insecure and were largely replaced for serious
transactions by negotiable instruments, both bearer and non-bearer, more or
less (often less, even in private banking) backed by gold or silver.  
  
Thieves, pirates, highway robbers, and government confiscation were endemic
before the rise of paper notes which can be hidden much more easily, and non-
bearer negotiable instruments which can't readily be passed by a thief.  
  
Coin issue relied on trust and reputation and almost always started as or soon
became a monopoly associated with the dominant tax collector. Without
continual assays of coins a level of indirection based on trust and reputation
is introduced. Once one introduces yet another level of indirection, whether
of paper or bits, one introduces even greater reliance on trust and
reputation. These cannot be standardized short of a monopoly issuer, but vary
greatly from issuer to issuer. A one gram silver note from one issuer may be
worth much less than a one gram silver note from another. Risk can be
arbitraged, but moral hazard cannot be eliminated, and it's a big source of
transaction costs in fractional reserve banking. (And if you insist on 100%
reserves, that's an even bigger source of transaction costs).  
  
(There's a possible future exception to many of the above claims, namely bit
gold may be secure as bits with minimal reliance on trust and reputation).  
  
Another more subtle problem, but perhaps an even a bigger problem, is that any
single commodity is far from an ideal store of value, because neither a
monopoly issuer nor a modern market can credibly commit to maintain a single
standard for a very long period of time. As James Donald well observes,
"Wherever one authority gained dominance, the definition of a dollar quietly
changed." Modern markets can't credibly commit, OTOH, because they are
decentralized and it's not economically rational to make such a commitment
when one can invest in a diversified portfolio of commodities and deliver
legally reliable commodity futures, based on commodities stored at the
warehouse of a third party, at the redemption window.  
  
Since trust is limited, and thus the degree of fractional reserve limited,
standardizing on a single commodity will create vast demands for that
commodity, driving the price through the roof. The vast majority of its value
will be based simply on using it as a standard, and any change of standards to
another commodity will cause the price of the former standard to plummet. The
mere long-shot risk of an imminent change of standards will generate great
volatility in the standard's exchange value versus other commodities. Thus,
quite ironically, using a single commodity as a standard makes that standard
very risky as a store of value, unless one can credibly commit to maintaing
that as a standard for decades to come. Nobody can do that, especially where
one has monopoly or near-monopoly issuers or where mental transaction costs
are low enough (as the are on international currency and commodity markets) to
maintain portfolios diversified across currencies backed in many different
commodities.  
  
Diversification is a huge win, both for one's own portfolio and for overall
economic stability, and we can be certain that smart investors with computers
and electronic markets will take full advantage of it.  
  
Gold and silver, and even better the most valuable gemstones, do have
advantages where physical delivery is required, for example a redemption
window where one can redeem gold notes for actual gold, But with a reliable
legal system, one simply delivers legal rights in the form of paper or bits --
this is vastly cheaper than any physical delivery and is the same cost for any
commodity. Without a reliable legal system, there is no guarantee that a
redemption window based on either commodity futures or precious metals will be
secure. (Again, bit gold might provide an exception to this. It makes possible
a secure and cheap redemption window that doesn't rely on a legal system to
function).  
  
A diversified basket of commodities is far more secure, especially commodities
that have a "floor" value that comes from consumption demand rather than just
demand as money. Thus, gold and silver are for the most part the _worst_
standards for modern markets to use, and we have observed and can expect them
to exhibit both a high volatility and a slow long-term decline in value
relative to other commodities as long as modern markets remain reliable. (The
only exception is an improbable political disaster that makes electronic and
paper instruments, including commodity futures, insecure but somehow allows
precious metals to be used securely).  
  
There is also an important practical consideration: gold and silver that are
not issued by governments as official currency are _not_ money according to
the UCC and many other legal codes. e-gold and other commodity-backed systems
that function as money are caught between a rock and a hard place --
considered "money" for the purposes of money laundering regulations, but not
considered "money" under standard contract and other commercial law such as
the UCC. They (to greatly oversimplify a wide variety of regulations,
precedents etc. as usual when discussing law) get most of the burdens of the
law while getting few of the benefits of the law. Changing this would take a
vast lobbying effort and a change in the political wins that strikes me as
quite improbable.

