 _You got yourself a fully general counter argument to anything uncomfortably
big_  
  
No. The asteroid threat as I discussed is probably _not_ a Pascal scam --
because the probability is well-defined by very accurate and simple laws and
measurable deviations from same. Whence accurate expected value calcuations
for such threats, and we can do fairly straightforward observations to improve
their accuracy. Similarly, lotteries with well-defined odds and payouts are
not Pascal scams. These are two examples that have satisfied the burden of
presenting the evidence for the odds and consequences they allege. They have
successfully rebutted the presumption against alleged extreme consequences.  
  
The fine structure constant may well also fall into this good-evidence
category, if we can e.g. accurately trace the consequences of randomly
changing the constant to e.g. inability to form complex molecules via simple
laws that have been very well verified empirically. (Of course, there's no
good evidence that one can actually change the fine structure constant, so
it's just an academic hypothetical, but I'm willing to consider it as an if-
you-could-then-what thought experiment).  
  
Unfortunately, these neat and simple examples aren't typical. Most or perhaps
even the vast majority of alleged extreme consequences that many people
consider important are based on a far poorer quality of evidence.  
  
Indeed, my argument is far more about quality of evidence than it is about
extreme consequences or long odds. It's just that long odds usually (but not
always) tend to reflect poor evidence, and allegations of extreme consequences
tend to focus people's attention on fears or hopes of such consequences and
thereby bias them against demanding evidence or exploring evidence for other
consequences. The result being that expected value calculations (including the
ones our brains tend to do implicitly to judge the importance of an issue)
usually work very poorly in these situations. We should therefore put a strong
burden of presenting accurate (not merely precise) evidence on people alleging
extreme consequences. Our rebuttable presumption should be that any
particularly alleged extreme consequences won't occur.  
  
 _...there has been quite significant media bias against the warming in the
country most contributing to the warming_  
  
Quite the contrary, media in almost any country generally has strong
incentives to gain attention. To gain attention, they often talk
authoritatively about extreme consequences while presenting little or no
evidence, except for arguments from authority. We are supposed to believe it
based on their authority. I am calling bullshit.

