"a", don't accuse people of being disengenuous when you're the one who seems
to be pulling the bait and switch here. You raised the Manhattan Project, TVA,
and the interstate highway system as examples of successful government
programs, thus implying that they are analogous to hypothetical government
project(s) you favor to solve the global warming problem -- since that is our
topic of discussion. I've pointed out that the nuclear bomb and interstate
highways are not usefully models for tackling global warming because (1)
global warming is primarily a very difficult economic and political problem
and only secondarily a scientific problem, (2) even the science part of global
warming is less certain and far more complicated than the problem of making a
big nuclear powered boom (given the already mature knowledge of e=mc^2,
radioactivity, the properties of uranium, etc. that existed in 1941) and the
problem (solved long before Eisenhower's time) of building auto-capable
divided highways from point A to point B. The TVA is an even less convincing
example -- indeed it's a major caution about what we must be on guard to avoid
-- which I address below.  
  
Now you seem to be saying that, while you admire these old programs (at least
in terms of their immediate success in fulfilling their narrow goals), they're
not really your models for success against global warming? Please be more
clear on what specifically you are proposing when you say that government
should "encourage" or "incentivize" renewables instead of petroleum. Are you
proposing tax breaks for specific technologies? Government-directed R&D
programs? Government cash prizes for hitting particular goals? Your invocation
of Manhattan and TVA implied a centralized government-directed program; if
instead you are talking about tax breaks, taxes, pollution markets, or
something else please let us know the specifics. My argument is against what
you seemed to be implying, namely a centralized government-directed program.
If you have some different specific proposal, then knowing the specifics I can
debate that on the merits.  
  
As for the Manhattan Project being an unprecedented logistical feat, not at
all. The Roman legions, the Genovese _maone_, the Portuguese conquest of Asian
trade routes, the Dutch East India Company, nineteenth-century industrial
corporations, the overall WWI and WWII military-indstustrial mobilizations,
Germany's blitzkrieg, Japan's initial conquests in the Pacific during WWII,
the Holocaust, and so on were all unprecedented organizational feats for their
time. The Manhattan Project was neither larger nor more complicated than many
other large techno-industrial projects. Furthermore, it benefitted from a
small but crucial group of geniuses (i.e. Jewish refugee scientists from
Germany and environs) who were highly motivated to combat an enemy who hated
them in particular. That's not a normal or repeatable feature of government
programs.  
  
Examples of government-related innovation tend to be either wartime
necessities (as in the war-related institutional innovations I listed above,
which tend to be irrelevant or actively destructive to economic organization),
or serendipitous successes in a sea of expensive failures (Internet, radar),
or would have readily been invented by the private sector anyway (again
Internet and radar: the private sector independently invented Ethernet,
bulletin board systems, e-mail and many other precedents to today's Internet,
and radar takes advantage of an obvious feature of radio waves that would have
readily been seen as useful for commercial aviation had not the military seen
it first) or were old mature technology that government merely took over and
artificially scaled up. Take your example of the TVA. The the first half
century of electricty hydroelectric dams were privately designed and built.
Government mimicked these technologies and organizations and scaled them up
and made them more environmentally destructive. This was not at all an
innovative process, but much more a process of taking over mature technology
and organization developed by private industry, but on a larger scale and with
a legal immunity that allowed wholesale destruction of private competitors
(the actual innovators), the environment, and of productive and of vast areas
of locally prized private land, similar to what has recently occurred in China
with the Three Gorges Dam.  
  
The economic and environmental and poltiical _costs_ as well as benefits of
the TVA, the Manhattan Project, and the interstate highway system are crucial
to our discussion, because the economic and environmental costs and benefits
of any governmental programs to address global warming are crucial to our
discussion. And because so often government mega-projects legally immunize
themselves, hiding destruction of the environment and of third parties that
private parties would often have to be legally and financially be responsible
for.  
  
I've already pointed out that given a _simple_ physical goal (make a big
nuclear explosion, put a man on the moon, build a road from point A to point
B, stop an incoming asteroid) that merely requires a large temporary
corporate-style organization and a lot of tax money, government can generally
accomplish that simple goal -- _if_ we don't mind spending the money, and _if_
we don't care much about the side-effects (which government generally legally
immunizes itself from) or the long-term effects.  
  
I gave the asteroid problem as an example of a circumstance where the problem
would be simple and it would be clear that the benefits outweigh the immediate
costs, side-effects, and long-term effects. Once things get complicated,
however, political bureaucracies (or any other singular organizations) are
generally incapable of effectively making the required innovations and trade-
offs.  
  
Reducing global warming is neither a simple physical goal (the climatology is
anything but simple) nor is it at all a goal where good tradeoffs between
costs and benefits are easily and objectively characterized. This makes it a
very bad candidate for a crash government project. Instead, the distributed
nature of global warming (over a billion significant emmitters of carbon
dioxide and numerous costs and benefits, with a vast number of subtle and
often subjetive tradeoffs to be made) make it an eminently suitable candidate
for a highly distributed solution such as a market. But since we have such
little experience with fully international pollution markets, or pollution
markets involving large numbers of small emitters, or indeed international
pollution regimes generally, we need to start slowly and gently -- as in fact
the Europeans are doing.  
  
Indeed, the de facto "Gentle Kyoto" currently being practiced by Europe, with
pollution permits trading for the first few years at very low prices, and in
the process figuring out the crucial, subtle, and often unexpected problems
involved in measuring and accounting for "carbon", is a very good way to go --
and vastly better than many of the potentially devastating alternative crash-
programs that panick-mongers have been proposing or the sharp immediate
reductions that politicans are ignorantly hyping. (On one side we have
complete global warming deniers who totally reject Kyoto and on the other side
trash-the-oil-industry-now fanatics -- where are the rational and balanced
people in this debate? We certainly should not be taking major political
action when the major political actors are so irrational!)  
  
Let's take your example, renewable energy. First, it's not at all clear that
this is the best solution to the problem. It may well be that carbon sinks,
nuclear power, albedo engineering, sun shades, or some combination of these is
a far better solution. "Renewable energy" has far more the hallmarks of a
subjective religion (distaste for modern industrial civilization) than of a
clear objective benefit compared to the many alternatives. I'm not saying the
alternatives are better either, mind you. I'm saying _we don't know_ nearly
well enough to have governments commit vast sums one way or the other, or to
impose very stringent requirements on industry in order to force one or more
of these approaches.  
  
Furthermore, even if it miraculously it could be objectively proven that
renewables are the clear best choice over those alternatives, it's not at all
clear _which_ renewables are better. Solar? Wind? Geothermal? Biofuels? They
all have their adherents and detractors, their benefits and their costs. And
there are a dizzying number of alternatives within those broad categories.  
There's no single device or technogical milestone here that is the objective
goal, in sharp contrast to putting a man on the moon or making a nuclear
powered explosive. Instead it's a vast number of alternatives, moving towards
a system that will probably comprise thousands of different products (from
energy production to transport to heating and cooling to a wide variety of
other things) with a wide variety of subtle technical and social tradeoffs
that need to be explored. This calls for Silicon Valley style R&D, a wide
diversity of small efforts, most of which will fail, the antithesis of a
centralized government crash program. And indeed, as we speak there are a wide
variety of interesting Silicon Valley renewable start-ups, pursuing far more
avenues than you or I or any politicians could ever dream up.  
  
BTW, it's not at all clear that "regardless of whether you believe in peak
oil, it's a given that petroleum reserves will eventually run out or become
prohibitively expensive." It could turn out that we discover vast new reserves
of oil or equivalent (in the deep sea, through coal gasification, tar sands,
and so on) that will last for centuries, or that we slowly replace oil with
cheaper nuclear and renewables without oil ever getting exceedingly expensive,
or both of these. If you look at a solar system scale, BTW, hydrocarbons are
cheap and plentiful. Many comets and asteroids and moons are full of methane
and more complex hydrocarbons; Titan has vast methane and ethane clouds, rain,
and lakes. It's actually free oxygen that is far more scarce. (This is
probably only relevant to earth itself if Tom Gold's plausible theory of non-
fossil hydrocarbons is correct, but even if not it's an interesting
perspective).  
  
To get back to the main point, solving the highly distributed problem of
global warming causing pollution -- highly distributed and separately
responsible projects are where the real solutions lie, not in the wasteful
practices of political lobbying, which is where government mega-projects soon
end up effectively spending much of their resources(take the history of NASA,
for example). The key to success is that it's a massively parallel distributed
solution with the nodes each responsible, financially and to the extent
feasible legally (in terms of environmentally bad side-effects) for and thus
well motivated for the economic and environmental success of their particular
project. The best role for governments, if they choose to foster effective
solutions (as Europe largely is doing right now, but the ideas of many
politicians and activists are not), is to set up, test, and debug the
measurement, the accounting, and the trading rules that are needed for highly
distributed and well incentivized solutions.  
  
In your 20-year warning time asteroid hypothetical, the best strategy is to do
more observations and pinpoint the actual probability of the strike. This can
almost always be be done, given the simple nature of orbital mechanics, within
a few weeks to months of the initial discovery. Then it's fairly easy to
objectively compute the expected costs and benefits of the project, and thus
to make a rational large-scale political commitment adhering to these
calculations.  
  
This is not something that's possible with global warming, because neither the
problems nor the solutions can be characterized simply and objectively liked
that, and there is no straightforward set of observations that we can do to
reduce many of the uncertainties. Instead the biggest uncertainties are in the
social institutions and the only way to learn about those is to try them,
gently at first, and test them and debug them until they work. Basically the
"Gentle Kyoto" (i.e. Kyoto with relaxation of the originally too strict
targets) that Europe is currently purusing right now. It's setting up a market
which requires figuring out good ways of measuring and accounting for "carbon"
(i.e. greenhouse gases). We'd have to solve the measurement and accounting
problems for a carbon tax, too, so even if the tax turns out to be better than
a market what Europe is doing right now is a very useful and necessary
preliminary to large-scale action against global warming.  
  
Another way global warming is different is that it's a much longer-term
problem than just 20 years, both climatologically and institutionally. It may
take several decades to figure out how to properly account for and measure
greenhouse gas pollution, and to negotiate all the treaties we need, and to
otherwise develop the effective institutions and technologies we need to
tackle billions of emissions on a global scale without risking economic and
other kinds of environmental devastation.

