Two professors here at GWU, Orin Kerr and Daniel Solove have written on the
legality of the President authorizing the ultra-secretive National Security
Agency (NSA) to spy on U.S. citizens without getting warrants from the FISA
court. For further updates check Volokh Conspiracy and Emergent Chaos.  
  
For the President to authorize the NSA to bypass the courts and spy on
citizens without a warrant is very dangerous and very illegal. We have spent
most of the last century expending hundreds of thousands of lives and
trillions of dollars to fight against dictatorships, and now we are
accelerating down the entrance ramp to unchecked executive power ourselves.  
  
The Justice Department argues that the President has what amounts to arbitrary
powers in times of war or emergency. Here is some of what the founders of the
United States wrote that flies in the face of the Justice Department's view of
the law. What the founders wrote in our Constitution is, despite what the
Justice Department, Bush, and Gonzales say, still the law of the land:  
  
Article I gives Congress "all legislative power" including the right to
declare war and "[t]o make rules for the government and regulation of the land
and naval forces." Congress is entrusted with the basic war-making powers. It
may through specific legislation instruct the executive branch, and the
executive must "faithfully execute" these laws (Article II). To not faithfully
execute the FISA statute that requires a court warrant for a wiretap, for
example, is an impeachable offense against the Constitution. To fail to
faithfully execute the Fourth Amendment, which requires a court warrant for
conducting any search, is an impeachable offense against the Constitution.  
  
"All legislative powers" means these powers are inalienable: Congress may not
grant them wholesale to the executive branch. Congress could thus not in its
2001 war authorization instructing the President to use "all necessary and
appropriate force" have thereby given the President powers arbitrarily to spy
on United States citizens communicating overseas -- even if that is what
Congress intended, which is highly doubtful. Rather, the President's powers to
spy remain defined by the Congressional acts which specified FISA,including
the PATRIOT Act. These acts (like the Constitution itself) require the
executive branch -- that includes the NSA as well as the FBI and every other
such agency -- to obtain a court warrant before spying on the communications
of U.S. citizens, whether that communication is directed overseas or is purely
domestic.  
  
The very lame "process" of the President notifying a handful of House and
Senate leaders about the existence of some vague wiretapping program, which
cannot be further elucidated "for national security reasons," is no sort of
effective check and balance and thus, not surprisingly, is not mentioned
anywhere in the Constitution.  
  
Furthermore, the Fourth Amendment to that Constitution expressly forbids
searches and seizures without a court warrant, even if the Congress and the
Executive both approve.  
  
The utter necessity of checks and balances is well illustrated by what one of
the main drafters of our Constitution, James Madison, said about them in
Federalist #10. Madison thought that government, the ultimate in trusted third
parties, should not be based on an actual particular party: “ambition must be
made to counteract ambition. The interest of the man must be connected with
the rights of the place," and thus "it is necessary...to divide and arrange
the several offices in such a manner as each may be a check on the other –
that the private interests of every individual may be a sentinel on the public
rights.”  
  
President Reagan advised us when it came to dealing with power to "trust but
verify." Madison too fought to protect the United States against dictatorship.
If we are wise, we will follow the Constitution and protect ourselves from
dictatorship as well. As another of our law professors, Jonathan Turley, has
stated, the NSA by spying on American citizens without warrants is committing
felonies, and the President by authorizing these acts is committing felonies.
By law, the President ought to be impeached by the House, convicted by the
Senate, and thus thrown from office. Furtheremore, those conducting these
wiretaps at the NSA are felons who must under law be fired, prosecuted, and
imprisoned.  
  
But while we are "at war" (with Iraq, terrorists, drugs, and so on) a large
portion of the populace, including talk radio demagogues and most of the
current Republicans in Congress (with a few refreshing exceptions such as
Senator Sununu) genuflect to the alpha male as if he were God and to top
secret agencies as if they were God's messengers. Impeachment by a Republican
House and Senate? Fat chance. Dream on.  
  
Furthermore, impeachment and removal of Bush, would, however strongly it is
compelled by the law, only address the latest symptoms, not the disease. What
is really required is a rebirth of learning about the our Constitution and a
reformation of the Justice Department and our attitudes towards it.  
  
What the President and the NSA are doing is blatantly illegal in the opinion
of practically every legal scholar knowledgeable about the original meaning of
our Constitution, and indeed in the opinion of most legal scholars of any
philosophical stripe outside of the Justice Department. Over the years the
Justice Department has developed its own unique view of the world in which the
executive branch "in times of emergency" (which could mean just about any
time) has the arbitrary powers of a dictator. Indeed, the Justice Department
has been arguing, often with success, for the doctrine that the executive has
arbitrary emergency and wartime powers long before George W. Bush (and even
long before George H.W. Bush).  
  
The Justice Department has thus given lip service to "rule of law" while
slowly scratching actual rule of law and the Constitution to shreds. George
Bush and Alberto Gonzales are merely the latest mouthpieces of a Justice
Department that has been destroying what the founders fought for in 1776 and
debated and ratified in 1789 -- protection against unchecked government.  
  
We must thus reform the Justice Department and our attitudes towards that
Department. The Supreme Court should never treat Justice Department as a
source of legal authority. It should impute to their briefs no more
credibility than it imputes to anybody's else's brief. The Justice Department
is just another party with an interest -- except that this interest happens to
be aggrandizing to the executive branch arbitrary power over which the only
remaining legal check is the Justice Department itself.  
  
This is the Christmas season here in the United States, a season of the story
of when God came down to Earth as the baby Jesus and angels sang about Peace
on Earth. If we were ruled by God on earth, we would not need separation of
powers with checks and balances. Madison wrote, "[i]f men were angels, no
government would be necessary. If angels were to govern men, neither external
nor internal controls would be necessary.” But we are not ruled by an
omniscient and omni-beneficent deity, nor by angels: we are ruled by George
Bush as advised by a Justice Department that has forgotten what the
Constitution means. The Christmas infant when he grew up said to "render unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar, and unto God the things that are God's."
Our Caesar is, like the Caesars of old, trying to aggrandize himself with
powers that could only wisely be entrusted to an all-beneficient God. We thus
need separation of powers and checks and balances more than ever.  
  
And we need the Justice Department to stop aggrandizing power to itself by
misleading the President and the American people about the United States
Constitution. There might be an excuse of naive reliance on bad advice to
forgive the President for making the claims he is making, but professional
lawyers entrusted with enforcing the federal laws should know better.

