(continuing)  
  
As world population growth falls, we will see a return of incentives to
innovate in automation (which for simplicity we can think of as robots,
although in reality will be almost entirely non-anthroporphic and highly
specialized machines that do many unhuman jobs and operate at very superhuman
rates). And we will see a returning emphasis on the hard dirt, the physical
frontiers, although it will largely be poorer people who value their
livelihoods over politically enforced environmental cleanliness who will
pursue these frontiers.  
  
So populations that are poor and risk-taking yet smart will be the leading
innovators. And the vast virgin territories they will exploit are largely
below our feet, not in the heavens of space fans. If our planet is a pool
ball, then we have barely started to scratch its surface.  
  
Despite these efforts being driven by the poorer democracies, which will
unlike the spoiled rich countries decline to effectively ban physical
frontiers through draconian regulations, there will be plenty of demand for
automation engineering from wherever that talent can be found, demand for what
simplistic anthropomorphizing might call robotic engineering. We have seen a
revolution in computation. We are entering into a revolution in sensors so
that our "robots" will "see", "hear", "taste" and "smell" far more than they
do today.  
  
For the future remain innovations in effectors so that our hyperspecialized
robots will manipulate far more of the world, much of it many kilometers below
the earth's surface, below both land and sea. The cities of the more daring
and less spoiled will also be increasingly vertical, up into the skies with
stronger materials and down hundreds of meters below our cities and suburbs in
vast new tunnels for trains, shopping malls, dirty manufacturing, hotels,
apartments, condos, and much more. Earthsteading anyone?  
  
It should be remembered that a crucial part of the industrial revolution -- a
concurrent revolution which occurred before, during, and after the more famous
revolution of gears and steam -- was an agricultural revolution, which freed
up workers to move from agriculture to industry. Similarly, an important part
of future growth is freeing manufacturing workers to work higher up in
Maslow's hierarchy, be that polishing nails or programming computers to
increase our socializing, knowledge, and entertainment. And as we deplete the
low-hanging fruit of agricultural chemistry and geology we have to run a kind
of Red Queen race in agriculture and extraction, keeping innovation at a pace
sufficient for productivity in those most crucial and basic of areas to not
decline.  
  
BTW in responsse to H. Goat, I agree with your comments except that
socializing is hardly a "shallow" pursuit. It is important not only for the
happiness of the vast majority of people but also for many practical purposes,
including the team-building that is indispensable to almost all
entrepreneurship and innovation. How do smart people, with interests in the
appropriately complementary specialties, find each other, prove to each other
they have the needed talents, bond, and form productive teams? That is tens of
trillions of dollars worth of question.

