Byrne, that's a great point. "We the People" is still rather fictional,
though. Voters know so little about what they are voting for, and even
representatives know so little about what they are voting for, that most power
has, ironically, been delegated to unelected bureaucrats. Most federal
lawmaking doesn't take place in Congress, it takes place in agencies. Even
Congressional legislation, which is far fewer "lines of code" than agency
regulation, is drafted primarily by corporate lobbyists and government
bureaucrats, not by the representatives themselves. Most dispute adjudication
takes place in agencies, not in federal courts. Appeals can be made to federal
courts, but in disputes over the obscure effects of obscure chemicals on the
human body, or in any number of other disputes in the obscure specialties of
modern regulation, federal courts usually end up deferring to the expertise
and biases of the agency. The main bias of the agency is to aggrandize its
power, but this is very hard for courts to counter since they have to defer to
the expertise. Nor, for the most part, do the courts want to counter it: a
more powerful and intrusive federal government means more disputes, and more
disputes mean more powerful courts.  
  
In our statutory and regulatory lawmaking, only the lobbies of government
employee unions and corporations get a substantial voice, either in the mass
media or in the meeting rooms of the agencies where most laws are made. Voters
only get to choose between broad political philosophies based on competing
bureaucratic and corporate factions. Each bureaucratic faction wants to
increase its own governmental powers, and only secondarily wants to tear down
the power of the other faction. A faction sells itself to the voters primarily
on the latter and performs primarily the former. Moldbug has covered this
well, even if with rather too much verbosity and poetry. So "We the People" is
still a fiction, but a far different kind of fiction than the Founders
envisioned.

