An agent (or representative) is a person authorized by his principal (or
constituent) to act on behalf of that principal. The task of the agent,
ideally, is to implement the will, interests, or preferences of that
principal. The degree of communication and control of the principal over the
agent varies greatly. Examples of principal/agent relationships include
employer/employee, shareholder/management, and voter/representative. Agency
law and principles can be applied, metaphorically or actually, to all such
relationships. Economists study the “agency problems” that occur when the
agent’s behavior is influenced by other interests, especially his own. A
contract in which, when rules are not specified, one person is legally or
morally expected to learn and implement the preferences of the other, or at
least to maximize an abstract measure representing the preferences of another,
is an agency contract.  
  
Agency contrasts sharply with a grant of property rights. The grantee, the
person to whom property is granted, is bound by the rules of the grant, not by
the will of the grantor. A grantor can cause his interests to be represented
only through specifying, before the grant is made, the conditional rules under
which the grant is made. Within the grant condition and boundary rules, the
owner of property is legally expected to act solely in his own interests. With
political property rights, the “boundaries” are rules of legal procedure which
the owner may not breach. A similar but temporary effect can sometimes be
achieved with a contract that details all of the rules of the relationship,
with the legal and moral understanding that all else about the relationship is
simply a matter of personal preference rather than of one party learning and
implementing the preferences of the other.  
  
Representation distance estimates the degree of loss of information, control,
or both in a principal/agent relationship. In other words, it estimates the
degree to which the agent fails to know or implement the true preferences of
the principal(s). In a representative democracy or republic, representation
distance estimates the degree to which the representative actually represents
the interests (basically equivalent to economic preferences, but in politics
they might also include preferences to coerce others) of his constituents
rather than others.  
  
Representation distance generally grows with the size of group represented.
Since even any two people communicate imperfectly, and have conflicts of
interest between them, it's not even possible for one person to perfectly
represent another, albeit such representation can far more accurately
represent any interests than representing a group. One can think of this
distance as being minimal, call it 1, when a person is acting for himself.
When one principal delegates duties to one carefully chosen and monitored
agent (a.k.a. representative), the distance is some greater value, perhaps 2.
Representation distance is further compromised by majority vote, which leads
to two losses: (1) the interests become increasingly general and vague, rather
than the specific and concrete interests the voters actually have, as the
number of voters increase and (2) the interests of minorities tend to be
neglected. These numbers are purely illustrative (perhaps we should start at
zero), and the function whereby representation distance increases with the
size of the group represented is unknown.  
  
A similar effect occurs in shareholder/management relationships. Shareholder
interests vary greatly. Their time preferences for dividends or capital gains
vary greatly. They sometimes have non-monetary interests, as in "socially
conscious" investing. But the duty of management to shareholders usually gets
stripped down to a very simple one, a fiduciary duty to maximize profit.  
  
There may also be efficiency measures proportional to representation distance.
For example, the efficiency of investment in public goods (where the "public"
is just the population of voters) may be some function of the number of
voters. On the other hand, larger representation distance may have a good
effect in decreasing the ability of some voters to coerce or oppress other
voters via the representative.  
  
Vast amounts of money are put into K Street lobbying, primarily by
corporations and government employee labor unions. This is readily explained
by representation distance: the relationships between lobbyists and
Congressmen, and even more between lobbyists and unelected but influential
bureaucrats, often have a much shorter representation distance than those
between voter and Representative. (The much shorter physical distance, which
greatly facilitates face-to-face relationships, greatly helps to shorten the
representation distance, but these are otherwise independent ideas). We can
thus expect persons with sufficient resources at stake, such as corporations
and government employee unions, to put far more effort into lobbying than they
or others do into mere voting.  
  
Since a political representative represents not the only normal economic
preferences of voters, but also preferences to coerce others, large
representation distance is not necessarily a bad thing. An effectively
infinite representation distance is effective independence, which is often a
good thing. (We can’t achieve perfectly infinite representation distance, of
course). We want the legislative, executive, and judicial branches to operate
independently, for example, not for one to represent the other. However
political property rights, or contracts where when the rules are unspecified
on party is not expected to learn or implement the preferences of the other,
are usually a far better way than pseudo-representation to achieve
independence or infinite representation distance. Political property rights
turn at least putatively will-based (a representative is supposed to represent
the will of his principal(s)) system into a rule-based system (the owner must
operate within the procedural bounds of his property right, and is expected
within those rules to learn and follow only his own preferences). Pseudo-
representation -- the use of the language of agency depsite a very large
representation distance -- may, however, provide an illusion of participation
sufficient to satisfy the naive that their interests are actually being
represented.  
  
To summarize, no group is truly homogenous, so it's not possible to perfectly
represent any group. Since even any two people communicate imperfectly, and
have conflicts of interest between them, it's not even possible for one person
to perfectly represent another, albeit such representation can far more
accurately represent any interests than representing a group. Thus
representation distance grows with the size of group represented. Much
politics can be explained by problems caused by representation distances that
are too long or too short, or by poor estimates of representation distance
made by naive participants.  
  
[These comments are based on my comments on a previous post, and thanks to
"anonymous" for reminding me about my old idea of representation distance, and
for the idea that bribery of a representative by a third party increases
representation distance from the principal].  
  
Here are some links to learn about agency law, the principal/agent problem,
and political property rights.

