Dmytry, I'm not sure I can agree that the above listed alleged negative
consquences of global warming (floods, droughts, hurricanes, and tornadoes)
are being "very unfairly" dicounted, or that they are being discounted for the
reason you cite. The public needs far more to go on than arguments from
authority, because (as much of the list above suggests, and many more examples
I could give besides) authorities are usually wrong about extreme
consequences. The more extreme the alleged consequences, the more likely that
authorities will exagerate them, due to the biases I discussed in the first
part of "Pascal's scams". To which I'd add another bias -- greater alleged
consequences gain more attention and are thus selectively chosen for media
coverage, and thereby also gain funding for the authorities who claim to
combat such threats. So media and other authorities have strong incentives to
bend reality to motivate their own funding.  
  
And in the case of the most extreme alleged consequences, which often
privilege one extreme possibility over a very large space of more benign or
even opposite utility possibilities, this bending can twist the truth beyond
all semblance to what is actually probable, and such forgery or delusion
cannot be readily detected and is often readily beleived. Giving the rest of
us who recognize this phenomenon all the more reason to discount "the sky is
falling!" predictions.  
  
So the sad reality is that outside the hard sciences, which give rise to very
high accuracy and indendently repeatable experiments that bear quite directly
on the causal mechanism in question, and with some other exceptions that
aren't relevant to global warming, authorities aren't a good source of truth
about extreme consequences.  
  
So the public has a right to put alleged "negative consequences for pretty
solid reasons", which don't seem to us layfolk very solid at all, unless we
blindly trust authority on such matters, through the Pascal scam wringer:  
  
(1) How good is the evidence for each chain the the causal connection from CO2
to the alleged set of future fires, tornadoes, floods, and/or hurricanes?  
  
(2) Are _all_ the significantly possible consequences being properly taken
into account, or are only certain extreme consequences being dwelt on to the
negligence of other major consequences of opposite utility?  
  
(3) If the evidence is not so solid, what experiments can we do to make it
solid, before we are forced to spend billions (or in the case of global
warming, trillions!) on alleged solutions to the alleged problem? In other
words, is the "other person" in your scenario giving a _proximitely testable_
prediction -- i.e. a prediction where the prediction of more distant severe
harm can be soundly falsified or verified, by sound empirical observation and
sound induction to a simple set of general rules, before the expenditures to
prevent or mitigate those alleged distant harms need to be undertaken?  
  
You can convince me if you can successfully put such a theory through the
Pascal scam wringer, and I suspect it would help you convince much of the rest
of the public as well.

