TipIt proposes to include a content aggregation feature showing the best-
tipped pieces of content, since a tip is more credible than your typical
content vote on an aggregator like digg or reddit. This suggests to me an even
bigger idea: to provide similar incentives for Internet tipping as we have for
tipping at a dinner out -- to make it an expected social practice -- combine
tipping with content aggregators like reddit or digg or socializing services
like facebook with features as described below.  
  
With content we don't know how much it's worth until we've already consumed it
(a classic measurement problem). A tip would solve this problem, but a tip is
a social thing and requires more than just a payment.  
  
If I were doing TipIt I'd change the design in four ways. First, I'd add
generosity signal features that inform one's friends or fellow tippers as well
as the tipee about the tip. This could be in the form of aggregator "karma"
points that name and ranks the most generous tippers. This would be like the
"karma" points which people who add content to a social aggregator compete
for, but it signals far more -- it signals that one is a generous tipper as
well as a generous contributor of reccomendations. There are a variety of
other ways (home or facebook pages, e-mail, etc.) that generosity signals
might similarly be sent within a social circle.  
  
Secondly, I'd add it to an existing aggregator rather than starting a whole
new service from scratch.  
  
Third, I'd add some extra security (cryptography, natch :-)  
  
Fourth, I wouldn't try to aggregate "microtips." I think these will have the
same kinds of problems that micropayments have. Instead, I'd make the tips
nice round numbers in increments of 50 cents or a dollar. That makes it simple
for people to keep track of their own tips and their friend's tips.  
  
So here's how it might work:  
  
Your client software (perhaps just a web page script) pays the tip (using an
already existing system like PayPal) to the content provider, perhaps via the
aggregator, and publishes a cryptographic proof that you made the tip. The
aggregator verifies the proof (if it's not the payment intermediary it does
this by cross-checking with the tipee), registers the vote, and shows that you
made the tip. This signals to others both that the content is appreciated,
that you are a generous tipper (thus transporting the social incentive to tip
from dining out to the Internet), that you have good taste, and that you put
your money where your digg vote is.  
  
Optionally, it could publish a bit of HTML code on the tipper's own blog or
home page, that links to the aggregator and shows how much a person has
tipped. It could send out e-mails to the tipper's friends recommending the
content and, along the way, informing the friends of the generosity of the
tip.  
  
If content tipping on the Internet will work at all -- and given the
measurement problem of content it would be very nice if it would work - I
think it's much more likely to work well if done in a social fashion like
this.

