As usual, Mike ignores the shocking reality that shows the evil of his
adorations -- that governments, primarily socialist governments undertaking
the the kinds of projects that Mike adores, have murdered people by the
millions -- by changing the topic to something only tangentially related. If a
mass murderer also worked by day as a surgeon, that wouldn't exculpate the
murderer for his evil deeds.  
  
Disease is also a non-sequitur as my comparison was about the security threats
posed by governments versus the security threats posed by terrorism. But even
if we follow Mike in changing the topic to disease, as usual following Mike's
line of reasoning quickly leads one into absurdity. Mosquitos are the fault of
capitalism and freedom? Would Mike have us believe that the rate of death from
malaria in, say, North Vietnam was lower than that in South Vietnam, due to
some magic that occurs when the government plans the economy in detail?
Perhaps Mike also believes that life expectancy is longer in North Korea than
in South Korea?  
  
Interestingly, terrorists share with governments the prediliction to mix
violence and charity. Hamas is a good example of that -- they won their recent
election presumably not so much from their suicide bombings as for the high
praise they won among Palestinians for providing health care and charity
services that the Palestinian government under Fatah was not providing. Hamas'
creditable charity does not justify its murder spree; no more do the good
deeds somtimes performed by governments justify their terrible history of mass
murder.  
  
Furthermore, the good deeds performed by Hamas do not lessen the security
threat from Hamas. If anything, they increase it -- since, in the minds of
people like Mike, their evil deeds are justified  
by their goods ones, their evil deeds are more likely to be encouraged and
committed. The same for governments -- the security threat from governments
increases the more their evil acts are justified by their goods ones.  
  
There's no doubt that some governments have sometimes provided some useful
health services -- where did you see me denying that? Still, when sanitation,
clean water, etc. have been provided by government these services have
depended on technology usually developed by capitalists and tax money paid by
a wealthy capitalist economy. Indeed, it was the ultra-capitalist 18th and
19th century British, who Mike must utterly loathe, who were the main pioneers
in public sanitation. Furthermore, these services often also have been
directly provided by private entities. Almost all the water I drink, for
example, is privately provided, and is far cleaner than the "government" tap
water (really the government is just funnelling tax money to private
contractors who provided the tap water, although various corrupt entites also
manage to siphon off much of this -- the money, not the water). Mike also
fails to mention that these utilities are also often used as means of
political control, as for example Israeli control of water is used against
Jordanians and Palestinians. Does Mike have numbers proving that government
saves lives more efficiently in these areas than equivalent private entities,
or is this just more ideological steam?

