The rights of parents to control the education and upbringing of their
children may be the most ancient and fundamental natural rights of all. From
modern societies to hunter-gatherer and neolithic cultures, and even back our
primate ancestors, parents and, secondarily, near relatives controlled their
children. In every great civilization, parents and near relatives determined
the upbringing and education of their children, with some pathological
exceptions such as a ancient Sparta, Nazi Germany, and communist countries.
There was little need to do anything but take this right for granted until the
rise of compulsory government education and totalitarian ideologies in the
late 19th century. In the 1920s, the Supreme Court reasserted parental rights
as a common law rights in the United States in two landmark cases, _Meyer v.
Nebraska_ and _Pierce v. Society of Sisters_.  
  
In _Meyer_ the Court classified common law rights as falling under the
substantive liberties of the Due Process Clause:

> While this court has not attempted to define with exactness the liberty thus
guaranteed, the term has received much consideration and some of the included
things have been definitely stated. Without doubt, it denotes not merely
freedom from bodily restraint but also the right of the individual to
contract, to engage in any of the common occupations of life, to acquire
useful knowledge, to marry, establish a home and bring up children, to worship
God according to the dictates of his own conscience, and generally to enjoy
those privileges long recognized at common law as essential to the orderly
pursuit of happiness by free men...Corresponding to the right of control, it
is the natural duty of the parent to give his children education suitable to
their station in life...

  
 _Pierce_ reaffirmed the the "liberty of parents and guardians to direct the
upbringing and education of children under their control."  
  
Most recently, "parents' fundamental right to make decisions concerning the
care, custody, and control of their children" was reasserted against a broad
forced visitation statute in Troxel v. Granville (2000).

