Mencius,  
  
Sorry, I didn't buy leftist propaganda during the Cold War and I'm not buying
it now. That "but for U.S. pressure" argument has long been been used by
leftists to try to explain why every one of the dozens of communists countries
miserably failed their people -- why Fidel Castro's Cuba is mired in poverty,
why Stalin and Mao and Pol Pot killed tends of millions, and so on. The
leadership record of these countries is quite stable compared to that of the
wealthier and far more libertarian democracies. Even if we ignore the high
instability of "ownership" inherent in frequent elections, there were more
successful assasinations in the West. For much of the last century communists
countries were quite secure, usually strongly allied with each other agaginst
the West -- most allied with the Soviet Union which was invulnerable to U.S.
threats behind its nuclear umbrella. The reality for most of the Cold War was
that the West threatened communism no more than communism threatened the West.
If insecurity were the main cause of oppression, Western Europe should have
descended into an orgy of genocide during the Cold War.  
  
And now that Kim Jung Il has nuclear weapons, your theory predicts that North
Korea will soon, quite unlike any communist country before it, magically
transform into a libertarian paradise that will put South Korea to shame. The
reality is that these despotisms, in some cases (as in North Korea)
practically equivalent to monarchies, went way out of their way to impose high
exit costs, because oppression satisfied the preferences of the leadership. I
recommend some reading material on the Berlin Wall and on the Iron Curtain
generally. These weren't called "prison states" for nothing.  
  
I'm not of course accusing you of being a red in libertarian drag. But you are
going way out of your way to try to conveniently label all the many examples
of highly oppressive and destructive monarchs or near-monarchs as "insecure."
A ruling family that has been in power since the 1950s, that successfully
passed the torch from father to son, has always been so extremely insecure so
as to starve its people while the same culture to the South turns into wealthy
capitalists? Baloney. Their ability to oppress their peoples to such an
extreme degree comes from their very security. Historically Kim's family has
had a far more stable rule than any ruler of Hong Kong (which in any case
hardly has had "clear ownership" and thus quite violates your theory) or (a
better example for you) Singapore. Thailand, Taiwan, Japan, South Korea, and
any number of other Asian countries are far less politically stable and far
more prosperous than North Korea.  
  
The main difference between Singapore and North Korea, as I pointed out
before, is what the government specializes in. You've conveniently picked the
three current ones with very small polities that specialize in a way only
about three small countries on the planet could -- a very small political
niche -- as world trade hubs, for which maintaining low exit costs is, quite
unusually for a government, incentivized rather than disincentivized for the
controller(s) of police powers.  
  
I'd be far more impressed if you came up with an example of a libertarian
monarchy in an oil-rich or agriculture-dominated country. You can't do it.
Heck, I'd be happy to see you come up with an example of libertarian monarchy
in an industrial country.  
  
Of course I am not basing microkernel government on anything like "self-
enforcing law." It's a rather bad reflection on you that you would dismiss
such a well-research design, with its many carefully designed checks and
balances, in such a cavalier fashion. Preventing the rise of "self-enforcing
law" is what the real political structures you are ignoring prevent --
separation of powers, franchises, and so forth Real mechanisms, not magical
hand-waving about Adam Smith and "the market" and how communist rulers would
magically turn into libertarians if only they'd pay dividends to Party
members.  
  
I'm glad you've read _Wealth of Nations_ as far as the famous unbenevolent
butcher of Chapter 1, but you'd do well to keep reading. The good Professor
Smith was under no illusion that for-profit governments act like companies in
a free market. Here is what Smith, who unlike us moderns was able to observe
many privately owned governments in his day, had to say about privately owned
governments:  
  
"[The small Danish colonies of St. Thomas and Santa Cruz] were under the
government of an exclusive company, which... had not only the power of
oppressing [the colonists], but a great temptation to do so. The government of
an exclusive company of merchants, is, perhaps, the worst of all governments
for any country whatsoever." (pg. 722 in the Bantam Classic 2003 edition).  
  
There is much else in Chapter 7 along these lines. Smith also has some very
good observations about the cheapness of land and remoteness from central
government power as enabling liberty. His observations parallel my comments
about exit costs and liberty. I'd love to see you do a blog post on Chapter 7
of Wealth of Nations and try to rebut Smith's arguments, unless (I hope) you
are convinced by them instead.

