A large variety of rights of travel, especially the rights to travel between
states and to leave the United States itself, are incorporated into the United
States Constitution via the Ninth Amendment and substantive liberty under the
Due Process Clause. (Take your pick: the Constitution is quite redundant when
it comes to asserting unenumerated rights -- we have, alas, repeatedly found
it necessary in our history to remind judges that unenumerated rights are the
most crucial part of our laws).  
  
Travel rights are found as early as the Magna Carta:

> It shall be lawful to any person, for the future, to go out of our kingdom,
and to return, safely and securely, by land or by water, saving his allegiance
to us, unless it be in time of war, for some short space, for the common good
of the kingdom: excepting prisoners and outlaws, according to the laws of the
land, and of the people of the nation at war against us, and Merchants who
shall be treated as it is said above.

The Articles of Confederation, the first constitution of the United States,
expressly protected the right to "free ingress and regress to and from any
other State."  
  
These rights of travel, as with a large variety of other traditional rights,
were incorporated into the Constitution via the Fifth Amendment Due Process
Clause and the Ninth Amendment Unenumerated Rights Clause. Rights of travel
were recognized in the 1999 case Saenz v. Roe.  
  
During the struggle for freedom in Eastern Europe, the Soviet Union and their
puppet communist governments turned their states into vast prisons by
restricting freedom to leave their countries. The Berlin Wall was a highly
visible but small part of this effort. Many died in their efforts to defect to
the free West. Thus reisen freiheit (freedom of travel) became a key demand of
those seeking freedom from these prison states, and when freedom of travel
became possible these states fell. Restrictions and burdens on the right to
leave a country are key symptoms that said country is no longer free.

