Leonard, thanks for the thoughtful and though-provoking comments. I tend to
think of emigration as a Malthusian equivalent to plague, and the 17th century
emigration was about 1/7th the percentage of the 14th century Black Death.
What generally happens in a plague or emigration is to slide up the Malthusian
isocline (i.e. less population and higher per capita income).  
  
If there is a "brain drain" that might regress the isocline itself, as could
short-term disruptions to various relationships and institutions, but I
suspect such effects are generally short-term. In the short-term the isocline
can regress and progress quite rapidly due to temporary outbreaks of crop or
livestock diseases, poor weather, etc. so it's very hard to track any
underlying progress or regress before the British breakout era except over
long periods. I have created a graph (this time directly calculated from
statistics) that by using 80-year chunks smooths out most weather and pest
problems and as a result demonstrates non-regressing progress from each
80-year interval to the next from 1200 to 1900 -- including through the Black
Plague. (The plague radically changes the position on the isocline of course,
but the isocline itself is still above and to the right of the prior).
Contrast to Clark's graph that jumps all over the place before the 1800s --
the difference is that he's using 10-year intervals that are dominated by
variations in harvests due to weather and pests.  
  
There are records of food exports and imports. Up to the 18th century they
tended to export food, but not much. More importantly Britain exported lots of
wool and goods made out of native wool, an activity that consumed considerable
pasture. Food imports weren't significant until the late 1840s and not
substantial until late in the 19th century. My focus tends to be on the period
1500-1840 where one can see unprecedented progress leading to breakout while
Britain was fully self-sufficient in food. (There was a very interesting
import earlier in the 19th century, not of food, but...but I shan't give out
more spoilers :-)  
  
You are getting very warm with your comments about horses. I've got a ton of
half-written stuff that covers these kind of ideas that I hope to finish and
post in the upcoming months. I better get them finished before you post them
first. :-)  
  
The best way to judge progress is by comparing to what came before, not what
came after. A number of technologies that seem entirely mundane or obsolete to
us were revolutionary in their day, and often as or more revolutionary than
the celebrated ones (e.g. steam). For example the reclamation of 1/4 of the
land -- it seems like a small growth rate to us, and quite tame compared to
the settlement of the U.S., but compared to prior history expanding into and
improving so much marginal land (a far harder thing than pioneering very good
land in the American Colonies) in so little time was unprecedented. Most of
this was land that had been pasture or waste for several thousand years of
agricultural history and now in the space of a century they're all over it,
and even more spectacularly pioneering marginal land without reducing overall
yield per acre or labor productivity.  
  
So my strategy has been to put aside (but not discard) the celebrated
"revolutions" and focus rather on the humble things that actually made the
biggest differences down on the farm. Many of the most important revolutions
took place in the sticks, out of the radar range of the people who wrote the
histories.

