The false dichotomy between "state" (or "goverment") and "anarchy" can be
highlighted every time someone tries to come up with a coherently stated
definition of either of these supposed opposites. If we take, for example,
Hans-Hermann Hoppe's definition literally, a federalist system of governments
like the United States is not a "state" at all, nor are a wide variety of
other political systems that have or could exist that could hardly be called
"anarchies". Here's Hoppe:  

> Let me begin with the definition of a state. What must an agent be able to
do to qualify as a state? This agent must be able to insist that all conflicts
among the inhabitants of a given territory be brought to him for ultimate
decision-making or be subject to his final review. In particular, this agent
must be able to insist that all conflicts involving himself be adjudicated by
him or his agent. And implied in the power to exclude all others from acting
as ultimate judge, as the second defining characteristic of a state, is the
agent's power to tax: to unilaterally determine the price that justice seekers
must pay for his services. [Source]

I'm not trying to pick on anarchists like Hoppe here. Statist political
scientists and politicians also oversimplify the world of politics and law
with this false dichotomy. This usually takes the form of observing that
modern governments have feature X, and by two invalid steps of logic (that X
is necessary for government and that without such government there is only
lawless anarchy) concluding that anyplace lacking feature X would be a lawless
anarchy. "Anarchy" is thus used as a boogyman to justify all sorts of
brutality, waste, and other wrongs perpetrated by modern governments.  
  
Let's start here:  

> This agent must be able to insist that all conflicts among the inhabitants
of a given territory be brought to him for ultimate decision-making or be
subject to his final review

The United States federal government does not "insist that all conflicts among
the inhabitants of a given territory be brought to [it] for ultimate decision-
making", nor even that all disputes are "subject to [its] final review." Most
disputes occur under State and local law, and the final arbiters of State law
are State supreme courts. Only in the minority of cases where a dispute raises
a question of federal law, or involves people from multiple states, do federal
courts assert jurisdiction. Nor, of course, do States hold an all-encompassing
monopoly of power -- many issues instead come under local or federal
jurisdiction. Furthermore, federal, State, and local governments all have
overlapping powers of taxation.  
  
Now it might be argued that some provisions of federal law, for example in the
Constitution, are so ambiguous as to effectively allow federal courts to
assert jurisdiction whenever they strongly desire to do so. To the extent that
there is merit in this argument, it only creates a conflict of interest
because federal courts are able to judge the scope of their _own_ power:  

> In particular, this agent must be able to insist that all conflicts
involving himself be adjudicated by him or his agent.

Hoppe indeed identifies a serious defect in modern constitutions -- they
violate the ancient common law maxim that no one should be a judge in his own
case. But this defect is readily cured without the kind of radical from-
scratch destruction and reconstruction of law and politics that the term
"anarchy" suggests. The reforms needed to cure this defect (described in more
detail here) are (1) selecting judges by a method completely independent of
the other political branches, so that in no real sense would judges and those
in other branches that they judge be agents of the same entity, or one the
agent of the other, and (2) by reform of jurisdiction, for example by changing
who has jurisdiction over constitutional questions. If federal courts were not
selected by Presidents and Senates whose power they then judge, and if federal
courts reviewed disputes involving state constitutions, and a super-federal
court reviewed disputes involving the federal Constitution, so that they did
not have final say over the scope of their _own_ power, conflicts of interest
of the kind that Hoppe rightly criticizes in modern governments would no
longer commonly arise.  
  
What Hoppe is really arguing against can more accurately be called
"sovereignty", the idea of one entity with a monopoly over all coercive powers
in a territory, than "state" or "government." There are plenty of
configurations of coercive power, in fact most such configurations over most
of history, that do not involve this kind of sovereignty. In highlighting the
problems of sovereignty I quite agree with him, but observe that the United
States and many other historical and current polities are or were not
"sovereign" in this sense, and many historical entities (such as the system of
political property rights over most of English history) were not even close.  
  
Those of us who would like to greatly reduce the brutal and wasteful powers of
modern governments do ourselves a great disservice by adopting the statist
term "anarchist." Anarchy is the boogyman of statists. A libertarian calling
himself an "anarchist" is like an agnostic or atheist calling himself a
"Satanist." Seek not for imaginary opposites, but for real alternatives.

