 _another depot within range means that your movement is bounded by how much
fuel you can afford to buy -- so activity is increasingly defined by the
marginal cost of staying in orbit, rather than the fixed cost of getting
there._  
  
Only true where materials native to space are used. Otherwise, the propellant
you can afford to buy is also bounded by the cost of getting there.
Nevertheless, even without native materials the value of propellant-related
real options increase with the density of depots, possibly in a nonlinear
fashion. But depots by themselves are insufficient -- the real option is
really a tuple {interesting place to go, propellant to get there}. So the
increase in valuable places to go, alternative things to do (like the long
list of options now available to the car driver I discussed above) in a given
orbital region is a crucial part of this growth.  
  
 _...one could bet on future fueling depot construction (e.g. a contract that
paid out $X per station per year over the next ten years -- you'd buy the
contract, launch your first depot, then sell the contract once the estimated
future number of depots increased)._  
  
I'm not sure I follow this. Who is the counterparty -- somebody selling
insurance against competition? Has anybody done this historically? It's an
interesting idea.  
  
Perhaps one could arbitrage between competitors. Sell insurance to A against A
losing too much market share, and to B against B failing to gain enough market
share (for a given level of investment towards such growth), with the
insurance company winning in the more likely case that B gains more than the
insured amount of market share but A does not lose enough market share to go
below their insured amount. Indeed, spread the market share risk across enough
companies and the insurance company always wins (but so do all the companies
through lower risk from competition). The usual problems of adverse selection
and moral hazard arise, though.  
  
If this was going to work, somebody would already have made it work, I
suspect. It doesn't require computers. (Both insurance and derivatives were
around in late medieval Italy. It's only when you want sophisticated
simulations or function-fitting, especially when constructing synthetic assets
from multiple derivatives, or when doing real-time arbitrage or hedging that
computers are required). Also, in a stock market investors can do a similar
kind of risk spreading by diversifying their investments across several
competitors.  
  
The most common way for the first mover to protect itself against copycat
competition is through property, especially IP, but gaining physical rights
over the best native propellant sources would also work well.  
  
Another technique, really one that is crucial for growing networks of real
options, is vertical integration. If, for example, you want to sell ethanol,
it's no good just to start making ethanol and hope people will come buy it.
No, you've got to sign up a large number of gas stations in an area to pump
ethanol, and you have to get car companies to sell cars that take ethanol via
the dealerships in that area.  
  
Electric companies, back when electricty was not the norm and they were in a
free market and actually trying to sell more of their electricity, often sold
electric appliances at stores they set up in the same communities to which
they were piping electricity, and often gave them away to people who signed up
for electricity service. It's no good generating and piping electricity out to
houses that have no electric appliances. The real option tuple here is
{electricity piped to house, useful electric appliances sold locally}.  
  
Back to space depots, an entrepreneur has to sell the real options they make
possible, and has to vertically integrate enough to make sure those real
options are delivered. For example to deliver extendable life satellites, one
has to sell the satellites to satellite operators (e.g. communications
companies) who want this feature, then make the satellites refuelable and
implement a depot. Much easier than trying to sell existing comsat makers on
the idea that they should sell their own customers on such features, make
their own investments in redesiging their satellites to be refuelable, and so
on. The space depot entrepreneur should also consider vertical integration
into "more places to go" to complete the real option tuples {neat place to go,
propellant to get there}.  
  
 _I've tried to figure out how the economy will look when going long
volatility is the best way to make money...the only way for a poor person to
get rich is to create volatility and hope said volatility works out in his
favor._  
  
By "create volatility" do you mean just bet at long odds, or do you mean
something active, like Marxist revolution? :-)  
  
Rich people get lazy and that gives poor people with brains plenty of
opportunity to make it rich. Somebody has to program those computers, advise
the rich on their investments, heal the rich when they are sick (or just want
to live longer), lawyer for the rich when they dispute, and so on. It won't be
the fellow rich, they're too busy having fun and then feeling guilty about it
and donating to Barack Obama.

