 _How can a perishable commodity serve as the backing for a currency?_  
  
There is a greater monetary price premium on those commodities with less
storage costs (e.g. copper and other metals above or below ground, oil below
ground) for this reason.  
  
However, there has also arisen recently a hefty premium on grains, even though
less storable, due to the same cause of the breakdown of the dollar and
dollar-linked currencies. In less developed countries grains, although more
perishable than metals, are being increasingly stored by people in areas where
food is politically controlled (and thus might be politically witheld).
Billions of people now lack _any_ stable monetary alternative. They don't
trust that they will be able to convert any other form of wealth in the near
future to what they will most want to consume (i.e. food), and are thus
insuring themselves by storing directly what they will want to consume, even
though they incur somewhat higher storage costs than they would with other
commodities. This, too, is a monetary phenomenon, although a pathological one,
a return to barter, reflecting a breakdown of money without a good replacement
for this segment of the world market. Storing food has high transaction costs,
but those who spend large fractions of their savings on food have no ready
alternative but to incur them.  
  
In the sophisticated international markets, by contrast, there is a low
transaction cost way to replace or augment government currencies, namely
commodity derivatives. The government currency transactions being hedged by
commodity futures are usually over shorter timeframes than the futures, so no
expiration problem arises. Near expiration those holding for a longer term
turn over the futures for later futures. There has actually developed a
significant spread between the expiring future and the actual delivery price,
due to the mismatch between the monetary demand for futures going well beyond
the demand for actual consumption of those commodities, and the imperfection
of arbitrage in responding to it in the face of transaction costs and the
unfamiliarity of these recently developed commodity market conditions.

