Here's another proposed jurisdiction reform amendment for civil cases. It
really needs work, but the basic idea is to take pseudo-contract and pseudo-
restitutionary arguments for jurisdiction over a person (often made by the
Supreme Court and commentators) seriously by insisting on real contracts and
application of real restitionary (implied-in-law) contractual principles.  
  
According to the pseudo-restitutionary argument, a government is entitled to
jurisdiction over a defendant because the defendant has "availed" himself to
the "benefits of the forum" (roads, crime protection, etc.) by having "minimal
contacts" with the forum (e.g. visiting there or selling stuff there).  
  
A more just approach along these lines is a true restitiutionary or implied-
in-law contract approach: a defendant should not have more of his liberty (via
injunction) or property in a civil case put at risk in a forum than the
benefits the defendant has received the from government asserting
jurisdiction. In other words the restitutionary argument should not be a mere
excuse, but should be treated much more like contract law actually treats
implied-in-law contracts (a.k.a. restitution) cases. I also include commission
of an intentional tort within a territory as implying consent to that
territory's jurisdiction.  
  
Another goal of the amendment is to deprecate territory, which is much less
important in an age of jet travel and the Internet. Territory can no longer by
itself justify jurisdiction. The amendment thus deterritorializes jurisdiction
where appropriate, and replaces it with jurisdictional choice (express
contract) and restitutionary (implied contract) jurisdictions.  
  
Specifically, the provisions reinforces jurisdictional choice and for default
jurisdiction (where there is no prior jurisdictional clause agreed to by the
parties) (a) replaces "tag" and "minimal contacts" territorial jurisdiction
over civil law with restititutionary (implied contract) jurisdiction, (b)
gives only the state where a contract or civil relationship (e.g. marriage)
was entered into jurisdiction for the life of that contract or relationship,
and (c) retains default territorial jurisdiction over local intentional torts
and property.  
  
Here is my very rough draft:  
  
 _Courts of the United States and any governmental entity therein ("forums")
shall have personal jurisdiction in a civil case over a defendant only where
the parties have agreed by contract to said jurisdiction, or where there is no
binding choice of jurisdiction clause in a contract between the parties and  
(1) the defendant has obtained benefits from the forum that outweigh the
liberty and property of the defendant put at risk in this dispute,  
(2) the defendant has while present within the territory of the forum
committed an intentional tort,  
(3) where the dispute involves a contract or civil relationship, and the
contract or relationship was entered into within the territory of the forum,
or  
(4) where the dispute involves existing rights or security interests in
property located within the forum and the remedy is limited to that property.  
_  
  
A wide variety of "gotchas" need to be explored, for example what happens when
there are multiple parties to a dispute with conflicting jurisdictional
choices. (There is case law precedent for most of these scenarios stemming
from already existing jurisdictional choice statutes -- some Christmas vaction
research for me :-)

