Libertarians have long observed with regret the radical expansion of the power
of the United States federal government over its original scope under the
Constitution of 1789. Lovers of freedom tend to blame two chief culprits for
this expansion: President Abraham Lincoln, who instigated our Civil War, and
President Franklin Delano Roosevelt with his New Deal. And indeed, these
Presidents did instigate some noxious precedents: Abraham Lincoln the draft
and income tax, FDR the advocacy of positive substantive rights and the birth
of practically unlimited regulatory power of federal government. Some cite
villains from the Progressive Era, such as Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow
Wilson.  
  
However, these theories oversimplify U.S. history to the point where the real
and fixable sources of our loss of freedom cannot be identified. They make it
sound like if we could simply go back in history and remove a handful of
powerful villains, or avoid a handful of crises, then we would be living in a
much freer society today. That is very far from the reality.  
  
The consequences of even Lincoln and FDR were not unmixed. Lincoln damaged
some freedoms, but he also greatly increased freedom by ending slavery. The
Civil War Amendments, especially the 14th Amendment, eventually led to a great
increase in the enforcement of unenumerated rights (hence the name of this
blog!) and the Bill of Rights against the states (and, for reasons I relate
here, hence also against the federal government). Among the leading countries
in the middle of the evil 20th century, the United States despite FDR was the
most free. FDR destroyed the threat of fascism and appointed most of the
Justices who ended forced and unequal segregation by race. One can easily
argue, especially in the case of FDR, that the curses outweighed the
blessings, but one cannot seriously portray even these powerful Presidents as
unmixed enemies of freedom. It's great fun, and may be morally imperative, to
blaspheme these great gods in the pantheon of government worship, but
criticisms of these particular actors don't get us to the core of why, in the
face of a Constitution that outline a strictly enumerated set of powers, the
adherents of that religion were able burst far beyond those bounds and render
them nugatory.  
  
The expansion of power of the U.S. federal government was not primarily due to
villians, crises, or revolutions, but far more resembled the proverbial
boiling frog: it mostly happened by small and obscure steps that were not
widely noted by lovers of freedom at the time, and have seldom been noted by
us since. The slow rot of Constitutional protections against federal power
stemmed from subtle but endemic flaws in the original frame of our federal
government, the rise of an economy where large numbers of people earned income
from auditable corporations (making the income tax, the most lucrative tax in
history, practical), and the disappearance of frontiers of free land to which
the overtaxed or overregulated could flee. This article focuses primarily on
the first, the clearest and most fixable cause, the procedural flaws in our
Constitution.  
  
The U.S. Constitution lists a number of enumerated powers, beyond which
Congress was granted no power to legislate. In other words, the U.S. Congress
was supposed to have a small, close-ended list of powers, and this is still
recognized by the Supreme Court as theoretically true today. If this had
remained true in practice, as well as legal theory, the U.S. federal
government would be a radically libertarian entity today. That it is no longer
practically true, is, more than any other factor, due to the long series of
usurpations of power by Congress under the Commerce Clause, which in its words
gives the Congress the power to regulate “commerce among the States.” At the
time, this power was thought to be limited to power to regulate the transport
of goods and persons across State boundaries, and indeed in the first century
of the Constitution it was largely in practical fact so limited. (There are a
number of other causes, such as the 16th Amendment of 1913 legalizing the
income tax, but the Commerce Clause is the way in which Congress has most
expanded its power to regulated, and an extremely vast expansion it has been).  
  
It’s fairly obvious why Congress, by itself, has not and would not seriously
let any kind of Constitutional text limit its own power. Less obvious is why
the Supreme Court, which has the final word on interpreting Congressional
power to legislate under the Constitution, would allow Congress to so greatly
expand its powers. But that is just what it did, by many slow and incremental
steps.  
  
Under Chief Justice Marshall, there were a number of cases restricting the
power of States to regulate what Marshall argued was interstate commerce, and
thus under federal jurisdiction. In immediate effect these were libertarian
decisions, since they overturned often burdensome State laws. The Marshall
Court, and the Story Court that followed it, refused to find, even once, any
limits on the federal Commerce Clause power. Although it was generally agreed
that “commerce among the States” was limited to the transport of goods and
persons across state lines, Marshall refused to define it in this manner, or
indeed define any clear outer limited to the Commerce power. Indeed, in dicta
(sentences in a legal opinion that are not legally binding, because they are
not logically necessary for reaching the verdict), Marshall suggested that any
activity that “effects” such transport might be regulated. Although Marshall’s
nationalist ideology set the tone, overturning state laws and ignoring federal
laws, this pattern of limiting state usurpations but ignoring federal
usurpations was largely continued by future courts, for reasons of bias or
conflicts of interest caused by court selection and structure which I describe
here.  
  
Although there were a handful of cases limiting the Commerce Clause in very
narrow and specific ways at the end of the 19th century, the _Swift v. U.S._
case in 1905 greatly expanded the Clause’s scope to cover manufacturing, not
just the transport of goods or persons across State borders, on the theory
that the manufactured goods would end up in interstate commerce. This was part
of the so-called “Progressive” movement, the rise of the modern religion of
"the government", an omnipotent deity called upon by the national press to
solve any major problem deemed to be national in scope. This era saw the
greatest expansions of federal power in U.S. history, including its basic
tools of financial power, the Federal Reserve system and the 16th Amendment in
1913 legalizing the income tax. During this era, in which states also greatly
expanded their powers, the Supreme Court was again far more active at limiting
the states than limiting federal power. The “Progressive Era” was a very broad
and general ideological movement, and most of it cannot be pinned on any
particular politician. Drivers of the movement included the steam press and
news wire agencies, which promulgated a national view (that vague godlike
phrase, “the government”, came to refer to the federal rather than state
government during this era). Under this new media system information transfer
became dominated by the press releases of powerful governments and
corporations. The spread of government-mandated education, again inculcating a
very nationalist view, in the latter half of the 19th century also played a
large role. The end of free arable land on the Western frontier and the rise
of the auditable corporation also played crucial roles in facilitating much
greater levels of taxation. During this era, except for a handful of minor
victories, the federal courts did not prevent Congress and the President under
the impetus of this movement from usurping vast powers not granted them under
the original meaning of the Constitution.  
  
After this, the New Deal simply delivered the _coup de grace_. In _Wickard v.
Fillburn_ , the Court proved it had no desire to limit the federal government
in any serious way, using Marshall’s “effects” dicta to justify its holding
that growing wheat on your own small farm for your own consumption is
“commerce among the States." Quite recently, the Supreme Court reconfirmed
this absurdity: growing marijuana in your house is also “commerce among the
States.” And thus the frog has been boiled. To this day our amphibian does not
realize that it has already been cooked. The idea that the U.S. Supreme Court,
given this long history of precedents, and the same kinds of selectional and
operational biases it has always operated under, will ever seriously limit
federal power again, just because that is what the Constitution says it must
do, is far-fetched. Our courts as currently structured will only protect
certain narrow rights of persons under the Bill of Rights from otherwise
omnipotent governments. The idea that “We the People” will somehow elect a
Congress or President that will voluntarily waive their own powers is even
more absurd. Libertarians are playing a game with a very stacked deck, and
that deck is stacked by the Constitution itself, the very same Constitution
that in its original meaning was, substantively, radically libertarian, but
that included procedural incentives for Congress and the Courts to slowly
aggrandize federal powers.

