Jurisdiction is the legal right of a court to order coercive process: to
imprison a person, to put them on trial, to punish criminals, and to require
plaintiffs with a variety of remedies (ranging from payment of damages to
injunctions) at the expense of defendants. Subject matter jurisdiction is the
areas of law over which a court may legally assert jurisdiction, and personal
jurisdiction is those persons over which a court may assert jurisdiction.  
  
The question of which court has jurisdiction is in theory independent of the
question of which law will be applied ("choice of law" or "conflict of laws"),
though they for various practical reasons they are often in fact intertwined.  
  
Jurisdiction comes in three basic forms:  
  
(1) Sovereign government. This is what we were taught in high school civics
class -- courts have jurisdiction over us because -- well, because they're
"the government," that's why. Many people now consider this the only kind of
jurisdiction. However, historically sovereign jurisdiction had its origin in a
much more general kind of jurisdiction:  
  
(2) Property. One owns jurisdiction over certain subject matters, and
exercises that jurisdiction over certain tenants or visitors to one's
franchise territory, based on conditions in the property deed or covenant.
Often the franchise territory is simply the territory of the land one owns and
to which the franchise is attached, but the charter defining the franchise
could specify a different territory. The largest jurisdiction is the realm
itself, the jurisdiction owned by the king, and consisting of all jurisdiction
in the realm not owned by others in the form of a granted or prescriptive
franchise. Jurisdiction as property was historically often associated with
feudal or colonial government, but the degree of decentralization possible
varied radically. In its more decentralized forms (such as those of medieval
Iceland, and to a lesser extent medieval and Renaissance England) this is a
radically different model of jurisdiction than that based on sovereign
government. More here.  
  
(3) Contract. This has been common in various times and places, and is on the
rise in many parts of the modern world in the form of choice of law and choice
of forum clauses (often called "arbitration clauses" because they often
specify a private arbitrator instead of a state court). Contractual
jurisdiction works much better for relational disputes than for torts between
strangers. Conceivably, however, a network of contracts in which people agree
to delegate consent to jurisdiction could grow dense enough to cover most or
even all persons who might contact each other. There are however no modern
examples of this. Medieval Iceland has sometimes been interpreted as an
example of universal contract-based jurisdiction, but is better viewed as a
hybrid property/contract system, since it was based on a franchise-like
property right called a "godord."  
  
The U.S. Supreme Court splits on its justifications for why a state may
exercise of broad jurisdiction. The view of conservative justices is just that
states are sovereign over their territories, period. If the state "tags" you
inside its territory you are "it" in their courts for any amount of liability,
even if you were just passing through. Liberal justices have justified state
jurisdiction as a kind of restitution or implied contract, described further
below. Under both views you can also be hauled in from outside the state if
you had "minimal contacts" with that state, for example shipping a product
there.  
  
Thoughtful political and legal scholars have long recognized that jurisdiction
requires much more than brute force assertion: it requires some kind of
consent of the governed. Legal scholar Lysander Spooner long ago debunked the
idea that government is a "social contract" that you and I actually agreed to
abide by. Neither you nor I have ever agreed to any such thing by any process
resembling that of formation in contract law. The liberal justices dredge up a
similar argument: by entering a state territory and performing some minimal
act, such as driving on the roads, you have "availed" yourself of the
protections of that jurisdiction. By driving on the road, for example, you
have availed yourself of the "significant benefit" of police services, and
thereby have now subjected yourself to the full sovereign jurisdiction of that
state -- even if that puts you in jeopardy of a penalty far out of proportion
to any benefit you have obtained, and even if the penalty is for something
completely unrelated to the benefit.  
  
For example, let's say you were married and living in New Jersey and your
spouse ran off to California with the kids. You visit California for three
days to see the children.  
  
Both the liberals and conservative justices in the U.S. agree that your spouse
can greatly extend your stay by hauling you into California court to dissolve
your New Jersey marriage and split up your New Jersey property. But they agree
on this grotesque idea for different reasons.  
  
According to the conservatives, California is sovereign and can simply can tag
you because you are in their territory. According to the liberal justices, you
have "availed" yourself of the "significant benefits" of the California laws
by driving on California roads, and thereby justified California gaining
control over your marriage, your children, and your property. (The actual case
was _Burnham v. Superior Court of California_ , 495 U.S. 604 (1990)).  
  
One cannot rebut the conservatives because they just make a raw assertion: a
conclusory statement, not an argument. Your spouse simply needs to file a
complaint and serve you with process in California territory: tag and you're
it. Stay away from your spouse and kids and your New Jersey marriage and New
Jersey property are safe from the tender mercies of the California courts.
Take one step inside and it's all up for grabs.  
  
The shallowness of the liberals' pseudo-contractual argument can be seen by
translating it to an actual contractual setting. Suppose you stepped onto a
car lot called Mike's Maserati Mecca and were talked into test driving that
slick silver bullet you certainly can't afford. After a thoroughly enjoyable
ride with Mike, in which you consented to follow his directions and availed
yourself of the significant benefits of his hospitality, Mike presented you
with a contract from the back office. He then declared that, by driving the
car, you thereby agreed to buy it. The price is the standard market price, but
that doesn't mean that you can afford it. Call it a "drive-wrap contract."  
  
No court anywhere I know of would enforce this "contract": your small act of
stepping into the car dealer's territory, availing yourself of property
protected by Mike's security guard, and even the somewhat larger and related
act of test-driving his car, in no way could be construed as consent to "rules
of the territory" that include an obligation to purchase the car. Many courts
have a derogatory name for this: "officious intermeddling." Another example:
if the neighbor kid shows up one day and simply starts mowing your lawn, there
is no implied contract whereby you owe the kid the typical price of a mown
law. You may be morally or reputationally obligated in your neighborhood,
depending on its norms, but it is not a legal obligation. The only vaguely
analogous situation where a court will allow a person to force a contract with
you is if you are completely incapacitated and desperately in need a help: if
a doctor helps you, a typical court will construe the existence of a contract
to pay the doctor a reasonable fee, because that is what you almost surely
would have agreed to had you been conscious. This implied-in-law contract is
also often called an action for "restitution": you have been unfairly enriched
by the doctor, and must "disgorge" the unfair enrichment.  
  
On the other hand, if you had started smashing on of Mike's Maseratis with a
sledge hammer, Mike would under traditional common law be within his rights to
restrain and arrest you for vandalism on his property. See also Semayne's Case
for the implied franchise that pertains to one's house to protect it from
trespass. While (in the same move away from traditional English law that gave
us the doctrine of substantive sovereign jurisdiction in place of property-
based jurisdiction) many jurisdictions have restricted rights to defend
oneself and one's property, many other jurisdictions retain them in statute,
such as the "stand your ground" statutes that give you the right to protect
your property as well as yourself in your house, and in some state in your
automobile and at your place of business. Similarly, if while in California
you started beating your spouse, there would be no traditional common law
objections to California dealing with you in defense of its resident.
Committing a tort (or crime) is itself implied consent to tort (or criminal)
jurisdiction.  
  
The liberal justices with their pseudo-contractual or pseudo-restitutionary
talk of "availment" to "significant benefit" giving rise to arbitrary
jurisdiction do not explain why California's assertion of jurisdiction over
out-of-state marriage and property is not also simply officious intermeddling.
They certainly do not explain why, even if you've unfairly enriched yourself
by driving free on California's roads, you should be forced to disgorge far
more than the value you obtained, and in areas of your life unrelated to
highway safety: your marriage, property, and children.  
  
Assertion of sovereign jurisdiction, the kind were taught in school is the
only kind, is in fact the kind of jurisdiction that is the most unjust and
that is on most intellectually shaky ground. U.S. courts either simply don't
try to justify it or try to justify it with absurd pseudo-contractual
arguments. Like their intellectual forebears with their specious idea of a
"social contract," many modern justices at least recognize the moral
requirement for consent to jurisdiction. But they too fail to address the
issue with intellectual seriousness, because the consequences for the law of
jurisdiction would be too radical: their own courts could lose most of their
power.  
  
There are some good arguments for some sovereign jurisdiction, but they lead
to a sovereignty far smaller than that exercised by the modern state. The
necessity for some minimal sovereign court, to which you and I are bound "just
because," seems unavoidable. For both the property- and contract-based
jurisdictions there seems to be the need for at least a "night watchman" or
"meta" court that determines the questions of basic jurisdiction itself. In
property-based jurisdictions such as the franchises of England, the king's
courts determined these questions as a matter of "trespass" on (infringement
of) franchise property. It was also possible for a court to trespass on a
defendant by violating basic due process rights associated with the type of
jurisdiction, for example torturing the defendant or by denying right to a
trial by jury. In a contract-based system, involuntary courts with large
territories would be needed to determine, if disputed, the preliminary
question of whether a proper contract had been formed with a proper choice of
forum clause. In the U.S. this question is answered by the court with
jurisdiction over the contract, usually a court of the state where the
contract was formed.

