When looking at the legal and political history that led up to the formation
of the United States of America, judges and historians typically look to
English royal and Parliamentary edicts as explanations and precedents for the
American government. This is too limited a view. Usually neglected are the
unheralded, deep, and indeed often dominant influences on the United States
government from medieval, Renaissance, and Baroque-era era corporations.  
  
During these eras corporations took a wide variety of forms. Abbeys,
monasteries and dioceses were ecclesiastical corporations; boroughs and cities
were municipal corporations, and a wide variety of other corporations existed
including merchant and trade guilds, universities, and hospitals. Royal law
did not make a strong distinction between these different kinds of
corporations as our law makes today between, for example, commercial
corporations and municipal corporations. They were all "corporations and
bodies politick" whose charters used the same basic form and language and
which often were granted various degrees of judicial and police powers as
property rights appurtenant to or held by the corporation.  
  
  
The Grand Union Flag of the American Revolution and of the United States as of
July 4, 1776  
  
For example, the Physician's College in London, a medical guild, was a
corporation that had the power (up until the famous case of Dr. Bonham) to
imprison anybody practicing medicine without a license within seven miles of
the City of London (itself a large political corporation). Nine of the
original American colonies were colonial corporations whose charters granted
them broad governmental powers subject to retention of "English liberties" by
the residents therein and the king's right to collect customs on merchant
shipping. "...one Body corporate and politique in Fact and Name, by the Name
of the Governor and Company of the Mattachusetts Bay..." was typical language
in these charters. These corporations were even sometimes (as in this case)
sold from one set of investors to another: the modern legal distinction
between commercial and political (e.g. municipal) corporations was not yet
common.  
  
One indicator of the importance of the corporate form are its influences on
the titles and symbols adopted by the United States.  
  
"Citizen" is shorthand for the denizen of a city: a member of a municipal
corporation. Members of a king's realm in contrast are called "subjects."
"Governors" were groups in charge of corporations (usually corresponding to
what in modern U.S. commercial corporations are called "directors," but
sometimes, as in many American colonies, singular), while "presidents" were
chief corporate executives who presided over meetings of the governors. The
head of the London College of Physicians for example was its President, and
each of the three centers of the East India Company was headed by a President.
"Secretaries" (as in Secretary of State, Treasury, Defense, etc.) were
corporate managers.  
  
The corporate influence went far beyond style to the very structure of our
government. Medieval republics usually operated under corporate charters, and
English boroughs invariably did so. These charters were at the same time
grants by the king (or treaties with neighboring lord(s)) and agreements among
at least a majority of at least one of the "classes" or "houses" of the city.
Thus, majority voting (among members of some class, not necessarily all
residents), "houses" (often two) which must both agree by majority, and
related aspects of our republican government, while often cloaked in classical
republican terms, more directly derived from medieval municipal corporations.
The idea that a majority can "consent" for other members their class also
comes from medieval corporate law (it certainly does not come from contract or
tort law). "Constitution" was often used as a synonym for "charter." The
United States Constitution can be profitably viewed as a corporate charter,
ratified by a majority of delegates to conventions in each State but shorn of
royal imprimatur. "The Queen...grants..." became "We the people of the United
States...do ordain and establish." "We the People" granted rights to
ourselves, in some vague collective way. This makes no sense in legal terms
outside the context of corporate charters.  
  
  
Flag of the East India Company, 1707-1802  
  
Of course, many titles and symbols did not necessarily have a corporate
origin. "Senators" were an oligarchic body from ancient Rome that also existed
in some medieval republics. "Congress" is simply derived from the word meaning
a gathering, and "legislature" is derived from the Latin "leges" or statutory
law. Nevertheless, the United States almost completely eschewed titles from
the royal bureaucracy apart from the judicial branch, with its "judges,"
"justices," and many other titles and symbols, as well as procedural and
substantive common law largely derived from the royal common law of England.
Other important substantive areas of our constitutional law (e.g. the Bill of
Rights) have diverse sources that include Parliamentary statutes and English
common law.  
  
Even some of our judicial law is however derived from non-royal sources:
equity comes from the law exercised by ecclesiastical corporations (canon
law), and much of our commercial law derives from the law merchant which
developed in franchise merchant courts separately from the royal common law.  
  
U.S. judges, justices, and historians thus make a grave mistake when they, to
take a currently quite important example, identify the vague "executive power"
of Article II with the old prerogatives of the King. The abuse of these
prerogatives were one of the major reasons we fought a revolution and gained
our independence from the United Kingdom. Given the corporate language and
substance of the United States Constitution, it is more accurate to identify
the powers of the President, where the Constitution itself is vague on the
subject, with those (a) of the President and the Commander-in-Chief under the
Articles of Confederation, and (b) if that is still vague, to those powers
granted and reserved by charter to the heads of colonial corporations, in
particular the corporate charters of the nine American colonies, (c) if the
issue is still uncertain, to corporate law from the Norman Conquest to the
Stuarts, and only if all those fail to give an answer to (d) the King whom we
rebelled against, and only then if said powers were not one of the stated
causes of the rebellion.

