 _If you exclude costs of coercion from the concept of transaction costs, I
don't see how that concept remains meaningful._  
  
The phrase "transaction costs" comes from the world of brokers. It suggests
something analogous to a broker's fee: a cost of bringing parties together, a
cost of haggling, or similar.  
  
Coercion is not usefully analogous to a broker's fee. You don't merely add it
on to the cost of doing business. It's a paradigmatically different thing,
creating crucially important negative sum games that Coase theorists ignore
(either by definition or by assumption). One chooses one's brokers, but not
one's bandits -- the broker fee might be so high that you choose not to
transact, but there is no "offer you can't refuse" \-- there is no coercive
negative sum game. Brokers provide a service not a lack of action for their
fee, and multiple brokers cannot come along and charge you for withholding
action. The coercion and negative sums of the game persist, and may even get
worse, when the parties are better informed, whereas broker's fees and
analogous costs fall when parties are better informed. These are very profound
differences between the two cases. To pursue analogies between them is to
engage in outrageous distortion of reality.  
  
A broad definition of "transaction cost" as "anything bad that can happen to a
transaction" also reduces the theorem to a tautology, or a mere restatement of
the assumption of the neoclassical market model: if nothing bad happens to the
transaction then the outcome is efficient.  
  
Coercion is the most important thing economic models such as those used to
"prove" the Coase theorem generally assume does not exist. The result is that
economic models generally only work in systems with sophisticated property and
tort law. Taking the most disparate bad outcomes and sweeping them under the
rug of "transaction costs" is a preposterously misleading exercise if one is
trying to understand how the interhuman world works. Even worse, is to, as the
broad-definition Coaseians often do, think that transaction costs, despite
being so broadly defined, can like broker's fees simply be reduced with
sufficiently informed people or computers with sufficiently clever
programming. Worst of all is using the theorem to explain the emergence
(Becker) or unnecessariness (Friedman) of the institutions that may reduce
coercion and thereby make the voluntary transactions that Coasians assume
normal in the first place. It's logical tail-chasing of the worst variety.

