In an article most Americans (not including me) will find outrageous, but many
international legal scholars and overseas judges will not, Scott Horton argues
that U.S. Justice Department lawyers who advised executive officers that acts
such as "extraordinary rendition," waterboarding, and so on were legal, when
they should have known that they were war crimes, can and should themselves be
prosecuted overseas for war crimes, along with the officers who ordered or
carried out the alleged war crimes. I have previously discussed how many
lawyers in and the bureaucratic culture of the Justice Department, and not
just the current President, are morally responsible for the expansions of
power, in violation of the U.S. Constitution and international law, that have
occurred in the U.S. executive branch in former as well as recent years. Now
Horton argues that these lawyers can also be held legally responsible for war
crimes under international criminal law when they advised, having actual or
constructive knowledge to the contrary, that those criminal acts were legal.  
  
Horton starts with a premise that should be self-evident: "In a proper
society, the lawyers are the guardians of law, and in times of war, their role
becomes solemn." Horton cites the Nuremburg war crimes case _United States v.
Altstoetter._ German Justice Department lawyers had drafted detailed
regulations implementing commander-in-chief Adolf Hitler's "Night and Fog" (
_Nacht- und Nebelerlass_ ) decree which authorized secret detentions, i.e.
"disappearing" or "extraordinary rendition" in wartime, a violation of the
Hague Conventions:  

> The [German] Justice Department lawyers were indicted and charged with
crimes against humanity and war crimes arising out of the issuance and
implementation of the Nacht- und Nebelerlass. The United States charged that
as lawyers, "not farmers or factory workers," they must have recognized that
their technical justifications for avoiding the application of the Hague and
Geneva Conventions were unavailing, because these conventions were "recognized
by all civilized nations, and were regarded as being declaratory of the laws
and customs of war." That is to say, they were customary international law.
Further, the United States charged, this decree "would probably cause the
death of human beings," grounding a charge of homicidal intent.  
>  
> After trial, the two principal Justice Department lawyers, one a deputy
chief of the criminal division, were convicted and sentenced to ten years'
imprisonment, less time served. This judgment clearly established the concept
of liability of the authors of bureaucratic policies that breach basic rules
of the Hague and Geneva Conventions for the consequences that predictably flow
therefrom. Moreover, it establishes a particularly perilous standard of
liability for government attorneys who adopt a dismissive attitude towards
international humanitarian law.

Horton also makes the interesting observation that Military Commissions Act,
recently passed in the U.S., by so clearly preventing prosecutions within the
U.S. for violations of international law, makes the assertion of overseas
jurisdiction against U.S. citizens far more clearly legal in "universal
jurisdiction" countries. Of course, practical politics will almost surely
prevent overseas courts from exerting coercive process over employees of the
world' s sole superpower, but it's nevertheless a quite interesting argument:  

> Clearly there will be no prosecutions in the US, certainly not under
Attorney General Alberto Gonzales, who would figure near the top of anyone's
list of criminal conspirators and whose name has already appeared in a
criminal indictment relating to Abu Ghraib. But what about universal
jurisdiction processes? Spain, France, Belgium, Germany, Switzerland and Italy
all have universal jurisdiction statutes. Germany has already entertained a
complaint against Rumsfeld, Tenet and others over detainee abuse questions.
That complaint was dismissed without prejudice by the German Federal
Prosecutor. In his opinion, the Federal Prosecutor stated that the first
predicate of the statute had not been met since there was no showing that a
prosecution for the crimes shown in the home nation of the defendants would
not occur. Considering the political and military position of the United
States, the invocation of a universal jurisdiction statute against sitting
officers of the government has to be viewed as more than an uphill task. But I
think passage of the [U.S. Military Commissions] Act has just made it a whole
lot easier.

Reaching U.S. citizens with coercive process could be very difficult. But
these universal jurisdiction countries could establish a war criminal suspect
watch list for use in their airports, just as we have terrorist watch lists.
Many Justice Department lawyers could then find themselves sadly limited in
their vacation itineraries.

