The non-delegation doctrine is often believed by legal professionals to have
been invented by the U.S. Supreme Court in some time in the late nineteenth
century. Furthermore, the popular theory goes, the non-delegation doctrine was
only enforced by the Court very briefly in a failed attempt to stop the New
Deal which broadly delegated economic lawmaking authority to executive and
"independent" agencies.  
  
In fact, the non-delegation doctrine was well understood by the Founders and
extensively debated in early Congresses. Proponents of the non-delegation
doctrine observed that Article I put "[a]ll legislative powers herein granted"
in the hands of Congress, and thus none of it in the executive branch. Thus,
they argued, all important rules should be made by the people's
representatives rather than by poorly accountable executive branch employees.
James Madison in particular was a proponent of a very strong (by modern
standards) version of the non-delegation doctrine. Madison and his colleagues
used the doctrine to argue that several Congressional proposals were
unconstitutional and thereby defeat the measures in Congress.  
  
In the Post Office debate I have chronicled, Madison argued that Congress
could not delegate to the United States Post Office the ability to define main
post office locations and the broadly stated origins and destinations of the
major post roads. He admitted, however, that at some level of detail Congress
could constitutionally give discretion to the Post Office to define particular
local routes. How far up, in the fractal structure of postal routes, the Post
Office could constitutionally be delegated such discretion remained unclear.
The outcome of this particular debate was that broad grants of power to
generally define offices and routes were unconstitutional, but legislation
defining the broad interstate and intrastate routes between major towns and
cities, and leaving further detail to the Post Office, was fine.  
  
The non-delegation doctrine has remained a slippery doctrine ever since, and
since the New Deal has fallen into disuse. We thus now have very broad
enabling legislation such as that of the Environment Protection Agency, which
grants the agency broad lawmaking authority over "pollutants," including the
authority to make rules regarding "any air pollutant from any class or classes
of new motor vehicle...[which] may reasonably be anticipated to endanger the
public welfare."  
  
Thus, argue the plaintiff states and environmental groups in _Massachusetts v.
EPA, _ the EPA has the authority to regulate carbon dioxide levels, even
though carbon dioxide is not particularly mentioned in the legislation: given
the scientific evidence that carbon dioxide causes global warming, carbon
dioxide is clearly a "pollutant" that "may reasonably be anticipated to
endanger the public welfare." They go on to argue that the EPA further has the
legal duty under this legislation to regulate carbon dioxide levels. Even
though the Bush Administration has decided that the EPA will not start
regulating carbon dioxide emissions, these states and environmental groups are
suing for a court order to force the EPA to regulate vehicle carbon dioxide
emissions.  
  
President Bush's EPA disagrees. It argues (in part by invoking non-delegation
doctrine precedents) that this broad language did not grant broad powers over
emissions of a ubiquitous molecule that is a necessarily substantial part of
life itself. If the harm of carbon dioxide emissions is admitted, literal
interpretation of the EPA's enabling statute, would, if it weren't for the
above limitation to motor vehicles (and presumably similar limitations to
power plants and other industrial activities for similar phrases elsewhere in
the stattute) give the EPA power to regulate not only power-plant and car
emissions but everything from forest and camp fires to the very air we and our
animal friends breathe out of our lungs. Our bodies after all "burn" food
calories and the oxygen we breathe in, producing carbon dioxide that we
breathe out.  
  
Without a non-delegation doctrine, (or alternatively without narrowly
interpreting the broad language to exclude such a ubiquitous part of our
bodies and the air), a vast amount of lawmaking power woould accrue to the
EPA, upon recognition that carbon dioxide is causing somebody, or somebody's
property, some harm, without any further initiative by the people or its
representatives. Surely Congress did not intend to grant the EPA such broad
powers, despite the broad language, the EPA argues (due to the industry-
friendly Bush Administration, since it's opposing its own bureaucratic turf
interests). The EPA is thus essentially arguing that grants of power should be
interpreted narrowly: a principle of least authority should be applied.
Madison would have added that even if this is what Congress had intended,
Congress is not allowed to delegate such broad lawmaking powers to a non-
elected body, just as it could not delegate the broad decisions on where to
locate main post offices and major postal routes to the Post Office. Such a
vast new area of lawmaking power must be initiated only by the people's
representatives, not by unelected bureaucrats.  
  
It's not clear whether the Supreme Court, if it decides to hear the appeal in
_Massachusetts v. EPA_ , will pay much attention to Madison's non-delegation
doctrine. The car industry's brief (intervening on the side of Bush's EPA)
dwells on a related phenomenon: given the broad grants of power in modern
federal statutes, the regulatory powers of agencies often overlap, and it is
this concurrent and thus conflicting lawmaking jurisdiction, rather than grant
of lawmaking powers generally, that is improper. Thus, the interventors argue
that regulation of carbon dioxide is better classified as regulation of fuel
efficiency than as regulation of a pollutant. Thus, it is under the
jurisdiction of another regulatory agency, not under the EPA.  
  
Furthermore, the states and enviromental groups may lack standing for failing
to demonstrate that global warming harms them in particular. As a scientific
matter, much of the recent average global warming is highly likely to be
related to rising carbon dioxide levels; a jury could find this as an
unreviewable (i.e. not clearly in error) matter of fact. But contentions made
about global warming as actually causing particular kinds of harm (such as the
idea that it is causing more severe storms or bad crop yields in some areas)
are highly speculative and probably cannot be reasonably proven in court.
Thus, plaintiffs hoping to force the EPA to regulate will probably fail to
demonstrate that carbon dioxide is causing them particular harm, and thus will
probably fail to establish standing. Both the standing issue and the "no
conflicting delegation" version of the non-delegation doctrine may thus
prevent this case from reaching the traditional non-delegation doctrine issue.
Nevertheless, the proposed massive expansion of the EPA into carbon dioxide
regulation, without any Congressional act specifying that the EPA should
regulate this ubiquitous molecule, but only harm-causing "pollutants"
generally, is a very good example of the kind of thing that Madison was
worried about and, for a time, successfully opposed.

