The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, which usually has
the final say on most U.S. patent appeals, and thus the most influence on the
development of U.S. patent law, has recently been eroding conservation of
rights, the principle that you cannot sell or claim more than you own, and in
particular that you can't reclaim it once you sell it. Under the patent
exhaustion rule, which is as old as patent law itself, patent rights are
exhausted upon the first sale of an object embodying the patent. The patent
holder is effectively allowed to sell the patent rights once per object,
rather than maintaining control shared control over the object with the
object's owners and possessors through its entire lifetime. The patent holder
is allowed to collect a royalty only once per object. Once the first sale
occurs, the object reverts from being held in a tangle of intellectual
property, with a potential wide variety of "owners" imposing a wide variety of
restrictions, to being owned outright by a single person or express
partnership as traditional (i.e. real or personal) property.  
  
The Federal Circuit has eroded this principle in a number of ways: by ignoring
foreign sales (so that for example an object first sold in Canada under a
Canadian patent, then imported into the U.S., comes under the thrall of the
equivalent U.S. patent), by excluding certain kinds of patents from the rule,
and by changing the default rule for implied licenses (i.e. ruling that the
default implication was that resale was not allowed, effectively extending
patent rights beyond the first sale), etc. In some cases patent rights seem to
disappear, but then reappear later on in the lifetime of the object. In other
cases the patent holder maintains a continued shared control of the object
over its entire lifetime, despite any changes of normal ownership and
possession over the object.  
  
The Supreme Court today in _Quanta Computer v. LG Electronics_ reversed, 9-0,
the erosion of the first sale rule via change of default rules and via the
exception of certain kinds of patents. LG Electronics had licensed its patents
to Intel, and Intel sold chips it made using that technology to Quanta, and LG
sued Quanta for infringement. The Supreme Court held that all kinds of patents
are covered by the first sale rule, and that the default (implied) patent
license terms assume no further rights of the patent holder over the object:  

> The authorized sale of an article that substantially  
> embodies a patent exhausts the patent holder’s rights and  
> prevents the patent holder from invoking patent law to  
> control postsale use of the article. Here, LGE licensed  
> Intel to practice any of its patents and to sell products  
> practicing those patents. Intel’s microprocessors and  
> chipsets substantially embodied the LGE Patents because  
> they had no reasonable noninfringing use and included all  
> the inventive aspects of the patented methods. Nothing in  
> the License Agreement limited Intel’s ability to sell its  
> products practicing the LGE Patents. Intel’s authorized  
> sale to Quanta thus took its products outside the scope of  
> the patent monopoly, and as a result, LGE can no longer  
> assert its patent rights against Quanta. Accordingly, the  
> judgment of the Court of Appeals [Federal Circuit] is reversed.

LG Electronics thought it could restrict subsequent use of the chips, and
indeed had a cause of action directly against subsequent users of the chips
(e.g. Quanta), via its license agreement with _Intel_. The Federal Circuit
agreed with this pathological reasoning, but the Supreme Court shot them down:  

> LGE points out that the License Agreement specifically disclaimed any
license to third parties to practice the patents by combining licensed
products with other components. But the question whether third parties
received implied licenses is irrelevant because Quanta asserts its right to
practice the patents based not on implied license but on exhaustion.

Imagine Alice could make a contract with her friend Bob which gave Alice the
right to confiscate things that you or anybody else bought from Bob. If
property rights would be confiscated from third parties by contract on ad-hoc
basis, there would be no effective property rights. Contracts should never be
able to impose duties on third parties. Only property law (via deeds,
licenses, etc.) can impose duties on subsequent owners or licensees, and these
transactions should strictly adhere to conservation of rights and intellectual
property exhaustion if they are not to interfere with others' property rights.  
  
For property deeds to impose duties on subsequent owners, they must either be
clear from the object itself (e.g. a physical object is obviously personal
property clearly belongs to somebody) or they must be clearly written and
publicly recorded (e.g. liens on personal property, real property deeds that
define property boundaries and restrict use of the property, etc.)
Furthermore, there should generally be _one_ set of restrictions based on
_one_ owner per object, or simple and well-known variations on that (e.g.
joint tenancy), not a wide variety of restrictions stemming from a wide
variety of people who "own" the object in different ways, i.e. intellectual
property owners. An intellectual property license, when as here is not clear,
should be construed to follow the default rules of intellectual property law,
especially those rules like patent exhaustion that preserve a standard sphere
of traditional property rights not entangled in a web of intellectual
property.  
  
My kudos go out to our highest court for defending traditional property rights
against further erosion by the Federal Circuit's pathological interpretations
of intellectual property law.  
  
Here is Dennis Crouch's take on the case.

