Thanks Paul! I mentioned the FBI rather than the KGB because many more readers
will be familiar with what the FBI is and was than what the KGB was. All three
are/were national "secret" police insofar as being national, rather than local
(and thus not associated with the community they are policing, but instead
forming their own insular community), and many of the activities of all three
being undercover or classified. And although you are surely correct that the
AVH was far more hated overall than the FBI, many people in the U.S. have
hated the FBI at various times and for various things (for example many blacks
and civil rights advocates have hated it for spying on Martin Luther King to
gather blackmail informatiion, a classic secret police tactic).  
  
That old surveillance, and Soviet-era surveillance, was practically nothing
compared to what is now being conducted today within the United States, albeit
now it is more socially accepted as part of the "war on terror."  
  
To some extent we don't have more dislike for the FBI for the same reason the
proverbial frog doesn't hate the water that is boiling him. For Hungarians
communist rule after WWII was a sudden new experience and thus immediate
loathed. Elsewhere (e.g. Cuba and North Korea) Stockholm syndrome has more
thoroughly taken over and the populations have stopped trying to resist.  
  
There are certainly also differences between the FBI and AVH. They enforced a
law that had far less free speech and didn't allow rival political parties, as
I described in my post. The AVH sometimes detained people without charges or
habeas corpus (for that in the U.S. so far you have to go to the CIA). They
sometimes just purposefully executed people withut trial, which AFAIK has
never been a domestic policy of the FBI or CIA (unless you count Waco, Ruby
Ridge, and many other deaths that the FBI argues were necessary to overcome
resistance to search or to arrest). But if off-battlefied killing without
trial now happened it would fall under the same legal powers Bush is claiming
and Rakosi claimed, namely the arbitrary wartime powers of an executive. In
the "war on terror" the entire world includling the domestic U.S. is the
"battlefield" according to many government officials.  
  
And of course, the forms of government are different, although I don't see why
oppression should be tolerated any more because our fellow citizens voted the
oppressors into power.  
  
If you can think of other specific differences or similarities between the FBI
and AVH let me know.

