The patent world was surprised today by the news that the Supreme Court will
hear the case Laboratory Corp. of America v. Metabolite Laboratories. The case
involves the scientific discovery that levels of homocysteine in the blood can
indicate a deficiency in two B vitamins. But how the Supreme Court resolves
the case may also have substantial implications for the patentability of
business methods and even of software. We could get at least one strong
opinion from at least one justice (John Paul Stevens) that from the point of
view of today's patent practice would be very radical. Such an opinion,
described below, would imply the invalidation not only of the kind of
scientific discovery claim in Metabolite, but also business method patents and
almost all software patents. It is unknown whether there are enough justices
to make this a majority opinion. The profound implications of such an opinion
suggest that the Court may punt and decide the issue on other grounds.  
  
Section 101 of the U.S. patent statute (Title 35) states that patentable
subject matter is limited to four broad categories: "process, machine,
manufacture, or composition of matter..." This implies, presumably, that there
other categories that cannot be patented. For example, "algorithms" and "laws
of nature" are two areas the Supreme Court has previously stated could not be
patented. (Why algorithms are nevertheless now routinely patented is the
subject of a paper I wrote last year -- I will attempt to summarize below).
The definition of what can and cannot be patented has changed over time. The
Supreme Court typically took a narrow view, for example in the Funk Brothers
and Flook cases. However, the most recent Supreme Court 101 subject matter
cases, Chakrabarty and Diehr, took a broader view. Diehr led to the modern
view that software can be patented. The Federal Circuit has tended to ignore
the restrictive cases, allowing software to be patented and, in the 1998 State
Street case, allowing business methods to be patented.  
  
Recently the United States Patent Office decided to align itself more closely
with the Federal Circuit and loosen up its restrictions on patenting business
methods.  But today, the United States Supreme Court surprised the patent
world by saying that it will hear the appeal in Metabolite. In this case, the
"inventor" discovered a law of nature, namely that elevated levels of
homocysteine in the blood tend to indicate a deficiency in the B vitamins
cobalamine or folate. To take advantage of this discovery, the "inventor"
claimed (in claim #13):  
  
  
  
> 13\. A method for detecting a deficiency of cobalamin or folate in warm-
blooded animals comprising the steps of:  
>  
>  assaying a body fluid for an elevated level of total homocysteine; and  
>  
>  correlating an elevated level of total homocysteine in said body fluid with
a deficiency of cobalamin or folate.  
>  
>

  
There is nothing novel about testing the blood for levels of homocysteine. The
only novel and non-obvious part of the claim is the scientific discovery, the
"correlating" step. If the claim is taken "as a whole," it (and any properly
written claim covering any subject matter) passes muster under Section 101.
If, however, focus is put on the subset of the claim that contributes to its
novelty and non-obviousness, that portion of the claim will fail as a
forbideen "law of nature."  
  
Here is how the Supreme Court in its opinion granting the appeal expressed the
issue:  
  

> Whether a method patent setting forth an indefinite, undescribed, and non-
enabling step directing a party simply to “correlat[e]” test results can
validly claim a monopoly over a basic scientific relationship used in medical
treatment such that any doctor necessarily infringes the patent merely by
thinking about the relationship after looking at a test result.  
>

  
This will be the first time in over a decade that the Supreme Court has heard
a case on this subject -- a decade that saw the end of restrictions on
software patents (despite "algorithms" being unpatentable) and the rise of
business method patents.  
  
So why can software be patented despite "algorithms" being a forbidden subject
matter under Flook and Diehr? Because clever drafters have added gratuitous
steps or elements so that a patent claim, interpreted "as a whole," involves
more than just an algorithm. For example, if you discover a new algorithm, you
can patent that algorithm running as a computer program on a "device with
memory." The "device with memory" is a gratuitous element, in that it does
nothing to add to the novelty or the non-obviousness of the claim. It is only
there to turn unpatentable subject matter into patentable subject matter.  
  
There is an old methodology that would have prevented such clever drafting to
get around the 101 subject matter restrictions. It comes from the old British
Nielson case. This methodology essentially says that, for purposes of
determining whether a claim covers patentable subject matter, you don't look
at the "claim as a whole," (the Diehr test), but instead just look at that
subset of the claim that is the inventive contribution. In other words, look
at only those elements or steps that contribute to the novelty or non-
obviousness of a claim.  
  
The Nielson test was followed by the Supreme Court in expressly in cases from
O'Reilly v. Morse (yes, that Morse, the telegraph case) in the 19th century to
Flook in 1978. Had Flook been followed, most software and business methods
would be unpatentable in the U.S. today.  
  
The most rational, but also most radical, way for the Court to resolve
Metabolite would be a return to the Neilson/Flook test. Rational, because it's
the only proven test we have for enforcing forbidden categories of patentable
subject matter, whether they be "laws of nature," "algorithms," or business
methods. Radical, because it would invalidate at a stroke not only the
Metabolite-style discovery-based claims and business method patents, but
almost all U.S. software patents as well. Justice John Paul Stevens wrote the
Flook opinion in 1978 and is the only justice from that era still on the
Court. So there is a good chance that we will at least get a strong dissent
along these lines. However, the more likely majority outcome will, if it
overturns the patent, do so on the more narrow grounds that it involves a
mental step ("any doctor necessarily infringes the patent merely by thinking
about the relationship after looking at a test result") or that it fails the
112 written description standard.

