The United States Supreme Court in _eBay v. MercExchange_ has held that,
instead of applying a general rule that patent infringement leads to an
injunction barring the infringer from using the patent, courts instead should,
as in most other areas of law, apply the four-factor equity test used for
deciding whether to order permanent injunctions. In other words, the plaintiff
must show that:  
  

> (1) it has suffered irreparable injury from the infringement,  
> (2) monetary damages are inadequate to compensate for the injury,  
> (3) the balance of the hardships warrants a remedy in equity (roughly
speaking, that the plaintiff will be hurt more by lack of injuntion than the
defendant will by the injunction), and  
> (4) the public interest would not be disserved by a permanent injunction.  
>

  
This holding overturns that of the U.S. Federal Circuit favoring the general
rule that, subject to a few exceptions, injunctions should issue when there is
infringement. The Federal Circuit generally hears all appeals in U.S. patent
infringement cases. It has been a _de facto_ supreme court of patents, since,
at least until this year, the actual Supreme Court accepted patent appeals
quite infrequently. If past history is any indication, the Federal Circuit
will probably try to liberally interpret the Supreme Court's opinion to
maintain the rules that it has championed. Here, it may try to read its rule
of general injunctions into the four-factor test.  
  
There are a number of clever arguments the Federal Circuit might accept in
order to effectively revert to the general rule. It might favor the plaintiff
with presumptions that each of the four factors are generally found in patent
cases, or reason by analogy that where injunctions were issued in a similar
case in the past, the four factors impliedly must have been found, and thus
should also be found in the present case. This would allow the Federal Circuit
to distinguish _eBay_ as involving a particularly problematic variety of
patents (business methods), or even just a particularly problematic instance
such patents, and in effect keep applying the general rule to other kinds of
patents.  
  
Thus, given the structure of U.S. federal courts, where generally all patent
appeals go through the Federal Circuit, the U.S. Supreme Court may have to
take several more injunction cases involving different circumstances than
_eBay_ before it effectively overturns the ubiquitous use or threat of
injunctions in U.S. patent cases.  
  
The concurring opinions also suggest that Justices Thomas and Alito may be the
swing votes in the Court's upcoming decision in _Metabolite_ _._ Chief Justice
Roberts will recuse himself. __Stay tuned.

