Eric, perhaps your summary was a bit too brief then. :-) I thought you
expressed the close link between externality and coercion very well and that's
what I was agreeing with. If I append the following two paragraphs to the end
of your penultimate message whereof I spoke, I would agree with it (but it
would contradict what you just said):  
  
The Coase theorem is false because it assumes voluntary transactions. (Whether
this is part of the zero transactions costs assumption or a separate
assumption, the assumption is there). But it also assumes that any prior
allocation of rights is possible, including rights that allow one party to
coerce another. These assumptions contradict each other, thus the theorem is
false. I gave the example of the music store which demonstrates that it
doesn't work in real-world situations as well. (One can also observe the
behavior of mafias, governments, etc. to see that this is so: coercive
relationships follow very different patterns than voluntary ones. The set of
big differences between contract law and treaty law is another example of
this). If externalities and coercion are equivalent, Coaseian negotiations
can't solve any externality problems (except by coincidence -- i.e.
negotiations won't have the outcomes they do for Coasian reasons).  
  
If externalities and coercion are not disjoint, then there are some
externality problems Coaseian negotiation can't solve (i.e. ones that can also
be coercive). Since I've shown it's easy to convert a mere externality into a
coercion, and thus a Coaseian bargain into an extortionate one, by converting
the mere Coaseian externality into a weapon, even with zero noncoercive
transaction costs the ability of the Coase theorem to handle even such
pedestrian externalities as sparks, pollution, noise, and so on is limited,
and can at best only be used if additional steps (probably legal steps, as in
tort or criminal law) are taken to eliminate coercive regimes (e.g. the music
store turning up the volume more than it would have otherwise preferred, the
railroad spending a bit extra to emit many more sparks, threatening people
with guns, and so on).  
  
Not very snappy as a summary, alas.

