 _a non-coercive system that operates only at the whim of those with the big
sticks_  
  
Many long-practiced arts involve many ways to divide up the big sticks, whose
disparate wielders force each other to follow rules, such that "whim" is
minimized. Many of these arts are dealt with in the above-listed articles.  
  
 _I don't see how a decent constitution or legal system can emerge without
market competition._  
  
The problem is that the good kind of (ex ante) legal competition in politics,
as opposed to the very harmful (ex post, war, etc.) kinds -- depends on an
already existing and fairly secure legal process. So there has to be a
protocol layer of legal process that does not depend on ex ante competition.
It should, like a good protocol layer, do only the minimum necessary (create a
good substantive law enforcing non-coercion), and no more. For example,
following an idealized version pre-Tudor English law, a central judiciary
could adjudicate issues of political property rights and nothing else (i.e. a
Supreme Court that adjudicates no substantive law at all, only procedural, in
which the only "legislation" consists of granting political property rights,  
and all other powers belong to the several owners of political property
rights. Note that this is very different from the U.S. Constitution and is far
more minimal that the typical minarchist's "night watchman state" but is by no
means the supposedly non-coercive anarcho-capitalism postulated by Rothbard
and Friedman. Although I do give the anarcho-caps props for inspiring me to
study polycentric legal institutions. Alas, I have discovered that they
severely misunderstand these institutions -- they are generally very far from
being based on voluntary contracts).  
  
This minimalist view runs up against the basically totalitarian view of modern
democracy in which "the people" are "sovereign", usually translated as
effectively meaning that "their representatives" can commit almost any kind of
coercion unconstrained. (Said doctrine derived from the totalitarian Roman
law, in which the emperor's, rather than "the people's", will was law).  
  
In other words, it's the Romanist ideology on which we were raised that
dictates that law degrades to "whim". Our reality under this ideology is not
the general historical reality, as a number of very good systems that far more
closely approached ideals of "the rule of law not of man" and substantive non-
coercion have existed (and many of their forms remain, albeit often well known
only to legal scholars not political scientists and other kinds of scholars,
who still largely operate within the Romanist ideology of universities and are
ignorant of traditional legal forms and especially ignorant of political
property).  
  
Both the modern view and anarcho-capitalism take the destructive Romanist "all
or nothing" approach to coercion. The real answer is to recognize the reality
of coercion and then pit it against itself to create an emergent system that
minimizes coercion.  
  
Olson is, alas, a democracy booster (as are most recent scholars -- that is
how they get their positions), but his bandit theory of lawless anarchy is
nevertheless the best theory out there about how anarchy works (and degrades
into banditry, of which stationary bandits are preferable to roving). It works
very well to describe for example Somalia, in which we've seen sub-national
stationary bandits (warlords) emerge against the domestic population and
roving bandits (pirates) against foreign. It also explains the Dark Ages (rise
of the roving banditry of nomadic warriors) and much else in history and pre-
history. Nothing else comes close to the explanatory power of Olson's bandit
theory in explaining lawless/prelegal politics. Of course it can be improved
upon, e.g. by adding in political property rights and a potentially wide
variety of other coercive forms of legal process that can emerge out of
anarchy in place of the generic "stationary bandit becomes government" theory.
But you have to read this blog to discover those theories.

