patrick: _Consumer and mortgage debt was a small fraction of what it is
today._  
  
We'll have to see just how much worse the housing crunch becomes. I observe
that relative to commodities, U.S. housing prices have already dropped by more
than half in just the last year. In euros the drop is less but still fairly
large. But the commodity and euro value of mortgage liabilities has also
fallen substantially: housing prices have only fallen about 10% faster than
the face value of the mortgages. U.S. real estate is now becoming a very
tempting bargain for foreigners flush with cash.  
  
 _I have heard reasonable arguments that the current growth of the money
supply is over 10% a year ( usually the stat shown is M3 or MZM )._  
  
Yes, but demand for dollars has also grown over most of the last five years,
at some unknown but probably lesser rate, and would grow again if the Fed got
its act together. The 10% is probably just a temporary phase to get us through
the current credit crunch. If the Fed gets its act together, the prerequisite
for $40 a barrel oil, M3 growth would be reduced to match demand for the
dollar, which means it might even have to shrink until such time as dollar
demand revives. It's possible, but not probable, that the Fed will continue to
behave pathologically such that M3 will keep growing in excess of demand for
dollars for the next 30 years. In that case, we could easily reach and pass
through $200, $300, etc. a barrel oil -- the sky's the limit. This huge
uncertainty, a possible price range between $40 and $300 or more a barrel,
based on unpredictable Fed behavior, is the biggest reason for the recent
surge of commodity derivatives and the growth of transaction and portfolio
hedging with commodities.  
  
 _If that's really the case, than holding on to assets would still be a better
bet than buying a bond paying 6%._  
  
But there are plenty of people who are buying Treasuries at 4.5%, implying
that they expect dollar inflation to be lower than 4.5% for the next 30 years
(or else that they are willing to pay a hefty negative real interest rate for
the privilege of holding a safe security for the next 30 years). Granted,
these people are increasingly hedging these bets with commodities, but
nevertheless there is still a huge demand for Treasuries at prices predicting
that they are quite secure and that inflation will not get out of hand.  
  
 _if 6% is all that it would take, why did Volcker raise the rates so much
higher than that?_  
  
Inflation had become far more advanced by the time Volker kicked in: gold had
gone from $35/oz. to $800/oz., and the CPI and PPI had been over 10%/year for
several years. Today gold has gone up only four-fold rather than twenty-fold
over the last decade, and the CPI and PPI have been less than 3% until
recently and are still less than 5% (albeit under a dubiously altered
formula). My guess is that M3 had been growing beyond demand for at least 15
years, from 1965 to 1980, vs. about 5 years today. There was also a very high
rate on Treasuries: reaching to the 20% range compared to 4.5% today. Back in
the good old 1970s we heard all the extreme scenarios about the world running
out of oil, metals, water, topsoil, etc. or the U.S. going bankrupt, that we
are hearing now, so I'm quite skeptical of all such claims.  
  
_Also note that in the late 40's and early 50's interest rates were even lower
than they are now. The Fed could keep these rates low because it did not have
to worry about smart money fleeing the dollar. Owning gold was illegal,
derivatives did not exist, and the US dollar was the most trusted currency in
the world._  
  
All good points. History never repeats itself exactly. But some of these
changes are positive for us -- with computerized derivatives, for example, we
can increasingly transact in weak currencies while holding net positions
denominated in strong ones, including commodities. Bankers also have far more
information about the health of the loans of their own and others than we had
in the 1950s, and consumer debt is higher (and savings lower) because long-
term inflationary expectations are much higher now than in the 1950s, so it's
probable that a much higher level of consumer debt is rational and
sustainable.

