Tom Bell and Glenn Whitman have engaged in an interesting debate over to what
extent intellectual property rights conflict with tangible property rights,
and to what extent intellectual property rights, like tangible property
rights, are natural rights.  
  
Roughly speaking, Bell defines natural rights as those rights that would
emerge in a "state of nature," i.e. in the absence of government law
enforcement. Bell correctly observes that real and personal property rights
would emerge, but argues that at least generally intellectual property rights
would not. I think this is only partially true.  
  
One poster responds with the example of symbols of office or other social
status (jewelry, seals, feathers, etc.) that exist in all civilizations and
most neolithic and hunter-gatherer tribes. I'd add that in England, at least,
offices themselves were property rights. Indeed, English feudal and royal
titles have followed for at least centuries the same inheritance rules as
those for real property, and were categorized in common law as property
(Blackstone described this well). Furthermore, trademark emerged in the common
law, suggesting it would also emerge in the absence of the state. Academic
norms of anti-plagiarism are a form of IP-like rights that we can observe
today being enforced outside of government. The Domain Name System (DNS) on
the Internet, and the related Internet Protocol address space, were enforced
without the formal legal recognition of rights in these areas long before the
DNS was discovered by the government legal system. Indeed, title in tangible
property implies a similar right to an accurate public attribution of who owns
what rights. The common law of defamation gives a person some further rights
in the accuracy of communications of others regarding oneself.  
  
Trademark, DNS, plagiarism, and defamation are rights of accuracy in labeling,
attribution, and other descriptions related to a person. There are some
natural rights to demand of another person's communications that they
accurately label and attribute objects and content related to oneself in
certain ways, such as ownership or origination.  
  
It's harder, though, to argue that copyright and patent have natural rights
analogs. One has to go from a right that a content or idea (as well as
property and self) be properly attributed to a person, to imputing to that
person a right to exclude others from communications of that content
(copyright) or use of that idea (patent), despite that content or idea being
instantiated in somebody else's personal property.  
  
The predecessors of copyright were the rights of lords and bishops to control
speech and writing within their domain -- a dubious origin given our First
Amendment ideals. Copyright still conflicts with free expression. P2P networks
originated as proposals for networks that it would be impossible for
repressive governments to censor. It turns out, though, that censorship-free
networks are also copyright-free networks. Copyright and censorship both rely
on having “gatekeepers” who the government can coerce in order to control
content. The state of nature on the Internet is copyright-free as well as
censorship-free.  
  
In summary, it's much harder to justify as natural law copyrights and patents
than legal areas like trademark and defamation that involve the accuracy
rather than ownership of information.

