George, thanks for your great comment. It is quite correct but with an
exception, namely that there are already a number of relatively
uncontroversial activities, such as fishing and oil drilling, and already
thousands of people living for months at a time on the ocean in fixed (or
nearly so) locations doing such things. The business in offshore oil is
growing rapidly and will probably soon be joined by a rapidly growing business
in extracting other kinds of minerals. It's done by ROVs rather than robots
which means people are needed on-site.  
  
I suspect we will see businesses spring up to provide nearly longer-term
living quarters offshore oil workers, and such employment rather than
political experiments will provide the main initial impetus for seasteading.
If Wayne and Patri can develop their new concrete/rebar subsea flotation
habitat that provides more real estate per dollar than an oil platform or
FPSO, I think they will have a big market for it both to replace FPSOs (i.e.
to provide real estate for on-site processing plants) and to provide longer-
term onsite habitations well before there are resources and wealthy
libertarian enthusiasts enough to do a long-term political seasteading
experiment. If their new technology works they should do a for-profit startup,
which could be quite lucrative, and do the political experiment later when the
technology is cheap and mature. Because of the provocative externality problem
I am afraid that even the political experiments will have to take some
restrictive measures that purist libertarians could not accept.  
  
Dan, the polar cities idea is very interesting, but off the top of my head I
see a few flaws:  
  
(1) Global warming hot enough to destroy agriculture in non-polar areas is
extremely unlikely even in the far future. In the earth's distant past we've
had lush growth in the tropics with CO2 concentrations more than ten times
those at present. CO2 makes agriculture more productive and plants can
withstand or be adapted to withstand far higher temperatures than even in the
tropics today. As usual with uncertain threats, people tend to greatly
exagerate the likely damages and overlook the benefits.  
  
(2) Near the poles it will be hard to obtain enough solar insolation for
productive agriculture.  
  
(3) Nobody can accurately plan an entire hypothetical economy to see if such
self-sufficient colonies are economically feasible. This is a harder problem
than trying to plan a real economy, which the Soviets etc. showed is also
practically impossible. What would really happen if global warming slowly
destroyed agriculture in the rest of the world is that our economy,
technology, etc. would incrementally adapt in ways we can't now predict.  
  
(4) The people living 400-500 years from now will know vastly more about such
things than you or I or anybody else alive today knows. Our speculations now
will not be of use to them, any more than consulting H.G. Wells is helpful to
engineers today.  
  
Bottom line: science fiction can be entertaining, but should not be taken too
seriously. See my previously post on the problems that can be caused when
people take daydreams too seriously.

