Response in reverse order:  
  
(1) That some other apes who eat mainly fruit can (mostly) defend their wild
fruit trees is not very good evidence that humans with weapons could defend a
substantial capital investment in cultivation against other humans with
weapons and fire. At least not without an improbable and risky advance in
social cooperation that I have suggested. Better evidence is the substantial
amounts that most later agricultural societies are known to have spent on
defense, including defense against hunters and nomads, to the point where
military leaders dominated most of these societies.  
  
(2) I don't share your intuition about ancient cultural transmission.
Admittedly not much is known about ancient travel patterns and cultural
transmission of technology, and even less about transmission of norms of
social cooperation (e.g. legal innovations). So both you and I or anybody who
talks about this subject is wildly speculating.  
  
There are plenty of scholars who have recognized influences from the Middle
East (ziggarats and pyramids, and other architectural and artistic styles),
and perhaps even China and Africa, in central and southern American
civilization. Given that many Polynesians over the course of a few hundred
years were blown off course into previously unknown tiny places like Hawaii
and Easter Island, I find it highly improbable that many of them did not also
make it to the much more probable landfall of America. (That, like the Norse
in Newfoundland, they didn't survive long is also highly probable). More
relevantly, since the Polynesians were probably too late for the invention of
agriculture in America c. 3000 BC, America is such a big target for boats
blown off course that Atlantic boats surely made at least hundreds of
landfalls in the years between 10,000 and 3,000 BC. Because these trips were
almost always one-way, and because it was an age of oral culture, these
discoveries would have soon been forgotten. (I don't think it's at all
coincidental that "Columbus discovered America" less than a half century after
the Europeans started massively using the printing press. Columbus discovered
America _for the world_ because the printing press was available to spread his
news among a rapidly literizing population).  
  
Another possibility: the first signs of agriculture in the Middle East date
back to at least 11,000 BC, which gives over a thousand years for those
innovators' cultural ideas (whether in the form of stories or a as technology
such as a weapon that influenced security and institution forms, making
possible but not usually immediately giving rise to agriculture) to influence
Bering land bridge immigrants even if they didn't immediately develop
agriculture as a result.  
  
Estimates of human population prior to agriculture, too, are rather
speculative. That we are descended from only about 10,000 individuals in 70K
BC does not necessarily imply a population bottleneck at that time. After the
spread out of Africa 70K-40K BC I suspect population soon grew to be almost as
large as it was in 11K BC. Also, the 100K I suggested is somewhat arbitrarily
conservative as some date anatomically modern humans to 200K, and it's even
not clear to me why even homo erectus could not have invented some primtive
form of agriculture, other than the prohibitive security costs of protecting
the growing plants.

