"Cybercrime" statutes often create a very vague and broad prohibition (e.g.
against "annoy[ing]" someone anonymously or pseudonymously, against
"unauthorized" access to a computer, etc.) For example, a bill recently hidden
in a U.S. federal budget authorization and signed by the President makes it a
crime for an Internet user to send or post a message on the Internet "without
disclosing his identity and with intent to annoy."  
  
Declan McCullough wrote this good layman's analysis of the new anti-Internet-
annoyance law. Declan's analysis has, however, been roundly criticized by
legal scholars based in Washington D.C.  
  
Scholars who fear the Internet or favor arbitrary government power, or who out
of excess love of authority wish to justify laws enacted from such
motivations, typically give three kinds of arguments to justify these
despicable mind police laws:  
  
(1) Don't worry about it, it was already the law. For example, the above anti-
annoyance law already applied to "telecommunications devices." But if it's
already the law, how is it any less useful to inform people that a law that
already exists, but that they were probably not aware of it or at least of its
implications, than to inform them of a new law? And if it's already the law,
why did whoever put the language into a bill feel the need to change it?
Eugene Volokh's markup of the bill's language (see below) demonstrates that,
contrary to what some others have argued, the recent anti-annoyance bill has
indeed changed the law for the Internet.  
  
(2) Dont' worry, "intent to X" is far more serious than the mere act with an
effect of X and doesn't reach nearly as many people. Unauthorized access is
not per se culpable, but intent to gain unauthorized access is. Being annoying
is not culpable but intent to annoy is. This avoids a basic question -- why
should a state of mind be criminally culpable just because one of the results
intended by that state of mind is a minor problem that occur quite often many
people's or business's lives, such as unauthorized access or annoyance? A law
that proscribes a state of mind intending to commit the act implies that the
result itself is so extreme that the criminal law should reach through the
wires to reach it. But Internet users are annoyed hundreds of millions of
times a day. There are millions of innoccous but unauthorized accesses per
day. These are nowhere close to the extremity of result required to render
intending that result to be a criminal state of mind. Furthermore, the law
does not say "sole intent" to annoy. This means that one can intend multiple
things by an Internet message, but as long as one of those intentions, however
minor, was to annoy a potential reader of the message, then under the plain
meaning of the statute you are guilty of a crime. Under the plain meaning of
the new law, if you intend to mildly annoy _and_ entertain _and_ inform
readers under a pseudonym, you a guilty of a crime. If you intend to entertain
and inform all readers and intend to annoy just a few potential readers (as
has often occurred with politically valuable speech, for example with much
pseudonymous speech in and related to _The Federalist Papers_ ), you are
guilty of a crime, under the properly interpreted statute.  
  
(3) Don't worry, the courts won't really take the language seriously.  Daniel
Solove, for example, argues "I'm certain that this [identity requirement]
provision will be read narrowly to apply to individuals who intend to
persistently or menacingly harass a person." How can he be so certain? Solove
is putting a very large degree of trust in the courts to read a statute in a
way that is very different from the plain meaning of the statute and in a way
that violates a basic canon of legal interpretation, namely that when Congress
adds a phrase to a list it must mean something that the other members of the
list did not mean. Congress must have added "annoy" because they meant to
cover more states of mind than just intentions to "abuse, threaten, or
harass." Nor does Solove explain why a court would be compelled by law, rather
than merely biased by an inclination to justice, to read the statute narrowly
if the court feels strongly that it should not. For example, the court may
find the political opinions expressed in the speech beyond their pale and
apply normal plain-meaning and common canon interpretation instead of Solove's
method of ignoring the text. Orin Kerr cites the First Amendment as a reason a
court would read the statute narrowly, but doesn't explain why a court should
not more properly apply the substantial overbreadth doctrine and throw out the
entire clause, or at least the entire word "annoy," as facially
unconstitutional. Kerr by making this argument implies that there are many
kinds of mind police prosecutions against an "intent to annoy" that fall short
of an "intent to...harass" that he expects courts to find constitutional. This
implies the result Eugene Volokh pointed out using a different line of
reasoning, that courts would be carving out a new exception to the First
Amendment for online and phone speech. Finally, neither Kerr nor Solove
address the severe damage done to our legal system in terms of notice and rule
of law when courts must throw plain meaning and standard canons of
interpretation out the window in order to do justice.  
  
Unless we can trust the courts to severely restrict their scope or find them
unconstitutional, these statutes are open invitations for prosecutors to
attack almost any variety of Internet activity they don't like and that they
think they can convince a judge or jury not to like. Cybercrime statutes are
generally not "laws" in the sense of "rule of law," but invitations to
arbitrary bureaucratic dominion over almost any kind of Internet behavior,
checked only by judges who wish to throw proper legal interpretation out the
window (and, in the U.S., checked by juries).  
  
Here's the actual language (via Eugene Volokh) of the anti-pseudonymous-
annoyance clause, with snuck-in revision that makes it apply to the Internet
underlined:  
  

> 47 U.S.C. § 223(a)(1)(C): Whoever ... in interstate or foreign
communications ... makes a telephone call or utilizes a telecommunications
device, whether or not conversation or communication ensues, without
disclosing his identity and with intent to annoy, abuse, threaten, or harass
any person at the called number or who receives the communications....  
>  
> (h)(1) The use of the term “telecommunications device” in this section --  
> (A) shall not impose new obligations on broadcasting station licensees and
cable operators covered by obscenity and indecency provisions elsewhere in
this chapter; and  
> (B) does not include an interactive computer service [= any information
service, system, or access software provider that provides or enables computer
access by multiple users to a computer server, including specifically a
service or system that provides access to the Internet and such systems
operated or services offered by libraries or educational institutions].; and  
>  _(C) in the case of subparagraph (C) of subsection (a)(1), includes any
device or software that can be used to originate telecommunications or other
types of communications that are transmitted, in whole or in part, by the
Internet ...._

