Here's my paper on private jurisdiction in English history. Franchise
jurisdiction played a crucial but unheralded role in the history of English
law and politics. Some private jurisdictions existed in Anglo-Saxon times but
they grew in importance in the Norman and Angevin periods, and in the
corporate form remained an important part of the British Empire until the 20th
century.  
  
A franchise, such as a corporation, a jurisdiction, or a right to collect
certain tolls or taxes, was a kind of property: an "incorporeal hereditament."
English property law was very flexible; as a result franchise jurisdictions
came in a wide variety of forms. Franchise jurisdictions included those of
manorial courts appurtenant to manors, secular courts appurtenant to
ecclesiastical corporations (on top of the Church's own jurisdiction over
family law), borough courts appurtenant to municipal corporations, merchant
courts appurtenant to markets and fairs, and mining courts apputenant to mines
and mining villages.  
  
For many substantive areas of law, the king's courts acted only as "night
watchmen" courts that reviewed, not the substance of the case, but only
whether the courts stayed within their jurisdictional and certain procedural
bounds. Generally, the only way to remove or undo the remedy of a franchise
court case in royal court was to bring one of several varieties of lawsuits
for trespass (tort) against the franchise court. Only if the franchise court
was trespassing on the defendant (because it was not acting as a proper legal
authority) or trespassing on the jurisdiction of the king or of another
franchise court could the case be overturned. Development of the legal
authority defense to trespass played a substantial role in developing many
modern constitutional rights of procedure, such as the right to a jury trial.
Under legal authority for trespass royal courts and officials were treated in
basically the same way as franchise courts and officials. Thus, except for
this "night watchmen" role of royal courts, where franchise courts and police
had exclusive substantive jurisdiction the law operated in a peer-to-peer
fashion via property relationships rather than in the hierarchical fashion via
principle-agent or master-servant (employer-employee) relationships of
imperial Rome and most modern court and police systems.  
  
Franchises could also be for jurisdiction over partially or entirely
privatized administrative territories such as "hundreds" (often like rural
townships) and counties. Broad governmental powers, including almost all, and
sometimes more, of the jurisdiction normally granted to royal common law and
equity courts, were granted to counties Palatine and many colonial
corporations (such as the East India Comany and the American colonies). The
results, in terms of civil liberties, were quite varied.  
  
In English property law, land tenures and incorporeal hereditaments (including
jurisdictions) were either granted or recognized in charters in a form similar
to the deeds of modern property law. When the charters involved large amounts
of land with appurtenant military services and jurisdictions, they were
political as well as economic in nature. These charters were the ancestors
both of modern property deeds and of modern state and national constitutions.  
  
The Anglo-Norman legal idea of jurisdiction as property and peer-to-peer
government clashed with ideas derived from the Roman Empire, via the text of
Justinian's legal code and its elaboration in European universities, of
sovereignty and totalitarian rule via a master-servant or delegation
hierarchy. By the 20th century the Roman idea of hierarchical jurisdiction had
largely won, especially in political science where government is often defined
on neo-Roman terms as "sovereign" and "a monopoly of force." Our experience
with totalitarianism of the 19th and 20th centuries, inspired and enabled by
the Roman-derived procedural law and accompanying political structure (and
including Napoleon, the Csars, the Kaisers, Communist despots, the Fascists,
and the National Socialists), as well as the rise of vast and often oppressive
bureaucracies in the "democratic" countries, should cause us to reconsider our
commitment to government via master-servant (in modern terms, employer-
employee) hierarchy, which is much bettter suited to military organization
than to legal organization.  
  
Fortunately, franchise jurisdiction has left permanent influences on modern
governments, including on the republican form of government in general and the
United States Constitution, federalism, and procedural rights in particular.
It also left a record of a wide variety of forms of law and government that
can provide us with alternatives to the vast employee hierarchies weilding
coercive powers that have given rise to modern oppression.

