Today the concept of personal jurisdiction -- the freedom of a government to
take action against a particular person for the purposes of enforcing a law --
is largely based around the idea that a "sovereign state" has personal
jurisdiction over the persons and activities within its territory. But in many
times and places this has not been so. Under the system of political property
rights in most of medieval Western Europe, for example, the kings had their
political property rights, and the lords had theirs. Both were governed by the
same basic laws of property, including laws of right (title), trespass, and
inheritance. The result was a sophisticated system of jurisdiction based on
property rights rather than sovereign rule.  
  
Both kings and lords had an incentive to respect each other's political and
economic property. This is illustrated by a speech that Shakespeare puts into
the mouth of Duke of York in _Richard II_ , when King Richard is threatening
to (under somewhat dubious legal arguments) confiscate the exiled Duke of
Hereford's estates and franchises (i.e. both his economic and political
property rights). Indeed, a major theme of the tragedy is that since the king
failed to respect political property rights, his own end up being overturned.
Note that "royalties" and "franchises" are synonyms used for political
property rights -- they are the same kinds of property rights as the king
himself holds, and alliterative redundant pairs like (e.g. "royalties and
rights") were common in legal language as well as in Shakespeare:  

>  
> O my liege,  
> Pardon me, if you please; if not, I, pleased  
> Not to be pardon'd, am content withal.  
> Seek you to seize and gripe into your hands  
> The royalties and rights of banish'd Hereford?  
> ....  
> Take Hereford's rights away, and take from Time  
> His charters and his customary rights;  
> Let not to-morrow then ensue to-day;  
> Be not thyself; for how art thou a king  
> But by fair sequence and succession?

  
The king's own rights to his realm are, in other words, based on the same
property law as the jurisdictions of the dukes, burghers, and other franchise
owners. Abrogate the law for others and it could easily be abrogated for the
king. But the long era of political property rights would end with the coming
of republicansim and democracy because Parliament and other legislatures do
not share this coincidence of interests. Only the dawn of an independent court
saved economic property rights in England and America -- but it was
insufficient to save political property rights, especially those of
jurisdiction which the "sovereign" courts seized for themselves.  
  
The late medieval English case of _Upton v. Le Mazerer_ provides a great
illustration of personal jurisdiction based on political property rights
rather than sovereignty. To get the most out of the following you should have
a basic idea what a life estate and reversion are. The basic issue of the case
is whether the the tenant holds property of the lord as a "sokeman" tenant (in
which case the lord has jurisdiction) or whether the lord had granted the
tenant a release from jurisdiction, making the tenant a "frank" tenant which
meant the king had jurisdiction. The meanings of all these will become clearer
as you read through the following description of the case, taken from my paper
"Jurisdiction as Property."  
  
Our cast has several players:  
  
(1) Lord Hugh, ancestor of the current lord.  
  
(2) Hugh, a tenant of the Lord Hugh. As the curtain opens on the facts of the
case, Hugh is a sokeman tenant of Hugh the lord, and thus Hugh the lord starts
with personal jurisdiction over Hugh the tenant.  
  
(3) The current lord, heir of Lord Hugh.  
  
(4) The current tenant, heir of Hugh the tenant.  
  

> In Upton v. Le Mazerer a “writ of right according to the custom of the
manor,” a dispute over lands of the manor, was removed...from the manorial
court because the tenant party claimed to hold in frank-fee rather than as a
sokeman of the lord of the manor. If this was the case the king, not the lord
of the manor had personal jurisdiction over the tenant.  
>  
> The agreed facts were that Hugh, ancestor of the current lord, had granted
to Hugh, a sokeman tenant (i.e. a tenant then under the jurisdiction of Hugh
the lord), the same lands that Hugh already held of his lord, but in “frank,”
thus releasing Hugh the tenant from the lord’s to the king’s jurisdiction. The
current tenant, a successor to the tenant Hugh, claimed the grant was frank-
fee, i.e. [in the king's jurisdiction] “for all time”, while the current lord,
an heir to Hugh the lord, agreed that it was a grant of freedom from the
lord’s jurisdiction but argued that the grant was only for “a term of life.”
The current lord, heir of Hugh the lord, argued that “we are claiming these
tenements as ancient demesne from the seisin of [our] ancestor, which is
higher in time than this deed” In modern terms, the lord of the manor was
claiming that the tenant now held only the reversion of the life estate, which
was just the original sokeman fee held of the lord of the manor, and thus that
the lord of the manor had regained jurisdiction over the tenant. The outcome
of the case thus hinged on whether the grant adding to the tenancy freedom
from the lord’s jurisdiction was for a term of life or a perpetual fee. The
outcome of this factual issue was not reported, but the reporter observed that
“if it be found that Hugh [the tenant] had fee, the original writ, which
remained in the lord’s court, would abate...[a]nd if it be found that he only
had for a term of life, then the parties shall go back to the lord’s court,
and plead with regard to the original etc.” The personal jurisdiction of each
court was entirely contingent on the outcome of the property issue: as one
Scrope (either a justice favorable to the lord, or one of the lord’s
barristers) observed, “[t]he scope of the averment is only to determine
whether the tenements ought to be tried here or sent back to the lord’s
court.” The reporter also noted main property law issue on which jurisdiction
hinged: “[w]hen a man recovers tenements from his ancestor’s seisin, he shall
recover the tenements in the state wherein his ancestors held them, and all
deeds made in the meantime between the ancestor’s recovery and the seisin will
be defeated by this recovery.”  
>

