Alrenious, the colonial charters crucially included grants of political
properties, in the positive form of rights to coerce others, as in the case of
the power to impose martial law in Africa. These are not contracts from the
point of view of those over whom these political powers are imposed: they are
"offers you can't refuse."  
  
From that point of view (and sometimes from others) these charters were more
like treaties than contracts. Contracts by law must be based on voluntary
negotiations, whereas treaties are often based on coercive ones -- the
difference is crucial, which is why there are very different bodies of law for
each.  
  
However, charters were not primarily viewed as either contracts or treaties,
but as property deeds -- in the case of colonial charters, grants of land and
political property from the king, later with the consent of Parliament, to
subject(s) who petitioned (and often paid) for such a grant. (Less commonly,
at least in the king's records, are further grants of political property from
the king's grantees to others -- like the Crown itself, there was generally no
"aftermarket" for buying and selling political properties, albeit in the
colonial era one could buy and sell shares in many of the colonial companies,
and the East India Company was a big part of the early British stock market).  
  
If some other party interfered with these political property rights -- usurped
them or prevented them from being exercised -- the King's courts would have
jurisdiction to hear the case. (The King being considered or in fact the
grantor of political properties retained jurisdiction over disputes over such
properties). Traditionally in English law this would have been dealt with as a
matter of "trespass", i.e. as what we now call a tort. (In fact, a large
proportion of early tort/trespass cases were over political property rights --
late medieval English kings didn't have jurisdiction over much else besides
that and the army). The usage, with the idea of political property rights, has
now become archaic, largely metaphorical -- political property laws have now
been revoked or fallen into disuse, government having been converted to the
Roman model of a near-monopoly over coercive powers.  
  
The claims I'm making about tort law related to Coase may be a bit different.
I'm claiming that normal negotiations and contracts that Coase was talking
about, among voluntary economic actors, i.e. the kind you need to approach
efficient markets, or where the main costs are usefully analogous to broker's
fees, depend on a sophisticated existing tort and property law to minimize
coercion including the use of nuisance/externality phenomena in a coercive way
(e.g. turning up the volume beyond what the music store would without the
doctor's office next door have preferred in order to extract an extortion
premium from the doctor in their Coaseian negotiation).  
  
Where coercion and political process are involved, all sorts of things happen
that voluntary-transaction-assuming economics usually does not model well.
That includes the old system of political property rights. (It's a mistake to
think they automatically led to market-like outcomes -- sometimes they did, as
in the case of the market fair courts, but just as often they led to coercive
monopolies like the guilds who had political powers to coerce competitors).

