Words like "rights," "freedoms", "liberties", "duties", and so on describe
crucial ideas but are often used ambiguously in politics and the law. Lawyer
Wesley Hohfeld early in the twentieth century in the United States developed a
classification and technical terminology for these ideas that goes far towards
eliminating much of this ambiguity.  
  
First Hohfeld defined these ideas as relationships between persons. Second, he
organized them into binary opposites and correlatives. Here are the binary
opposites -- you either have them or you don't:  
  
right/no-right  
freedom/duty  
  
(I'm substituting "freedom" where Hohfield and his followers have used
"privilege" , "liberty", or even worse "permission" -- for reasons that should
become apparent below). With respect to a given subject matter and under a
given set of laws governing that subject matter, you either have a right or no
right, never both. And you either have a freedom from duty or a duty, never
both.  
  
The most crucial aspect of this terminology is that these ideas are also
related as correlatives -- the existence of one implies the existence of the
other. Thus  
  
right of A => duty of (at least) B  
freedom of A => no-right of any other  
  
Hohfeld's terminology is often described (e.g. by the legal scholars Corbin
and Singer) in terms of "the state" that whose enforcement actions create
rights (and thus duties) and whose lack of enforcement action creates
"privileges" or "permssions". Regular readers of the blog will see at least
one problem with this approach, but does Hohfeld terminology make sense
independently of "the state"?  
  
Not only do these terms make sense without "the state", they make even more
sense without "the state" and even make sense independently of the existence
of anything like a state. Stateless scenarios help to illuminate the meanings
of Hohfeld's terms, and getting rid of "the state" will shed light on analysis
of the origins of rights. For example, by distinguishing a "right" from a
"freedom", I will create a much clearer description of John Locke's theory of
a "social compact" which highlights some of its strengths and weaknesses. This
generalization of Hohfeld terminology also allows us to apply it to real world
situations involving conflicting jurisdictions and laws rather than the
mythological monolithic state.  
  
Let's start with a Mr. Robinson Crusoe stranded alone on his tropical island.
Crusoe is able to do anything he likes without legal or other coercive
restriction, or indeed without a negative response by another person of any
kind -- he has perfect freedom. But he can't sue or otherwise punish anybody,
so he has, in Hohfeldian terms, no rights. Robinson Crusoe expemplfies the
correlatives "freedom" and "no right".  
  
Now let's strand a Mr. Geoffrey Dalrymple on the island with Mr. Crusoe. In a
state of pure amorality and lawlessness (which is to be sure purely
theoretical and in practice would not last for long), there are no rights of
any kind. Crusoe has no duties and thus perfect freedom to do anything (kill
Dalrymple, steal his food, and so on), and correlatively Dalrymple has no
rights. Dalrymple for his part has no duties and thus perfect freedom, and and
Crusoe has no rights.  
  
Do we require a state to introduce rights into this situation? In fact we
don't even need the introduction of a third party. To introduce rights and
duties into this situation, Crusoe and Dalrymple merely need to enter into an
agreement, a la Locke. This agreement could be as informal as a common
cultural understanding or as formal as carving words on stone. Let's say
Crusoe agrees not to commit a tort (battery, theft, etc.) against Dalrymple
and Dalrymple agrees to not commit a tort against Crusoe. Crusoe now has
rights (defined by tort law as he understands it, unless stated explicitly)
against Dalrymple and Dalrymple now has tort rights (defind by tort law as he
understands it, unless stated explicitly) against Crusoe. Crusoe correlatively
has duties towards Dalrymple, and vice versa, and both correspondingly have
their freedoms reduced. They have traded some freedoms for some rights. (This
is a much clearer way of saying, in the older terminology in which "freedom",
"rights", and so on were overlapping and often indistinct concepts, that
people have traded away some rights in order to preserve other rights).  
  
Of course the consequences of a right -- in particular the remedy available
for the breach of a right -- is hardly the same as in a mature legal system
with courts, police, etc. If one of Crusoe's rights is breached, for example
by Dalrymple stealing his food, his only remedy is to take an action himself
-- for example, steal back some food. Crusoe and Dalrymple would be wise to
specify such remedies in their agreement. We can see how a third party, or
even better courts and police, would help enforce such a remedy, but they, and
much less "the state", are not necessary for the basic Hohfeldian ideas of
right and duty to arise.  
  
Corbin, in describing Hohfeldian terms, invoked "a giant" as a metaphor for
"the state." It's easy to see that if a wise giant lived on the island it
would be profitable for Crusoe and Dalrymple to agree to use that giant to
hear their cases and enforce the remedy they had agreed upon. This corresponds
to the "choice of forum" clause found in many modern contracts. But let's say
there were two wise giants on the island, Giganticus and Gargantua. This
multiplicity of giants would certainly confuse Corbin's (and Singer's)
explanations of Hohfeld, but is in fact readily explicable in Hohfeldian and
choice-of-forum terms. There are often great advantages to division of labor.
Crusoe and Dalrymple could thus agree to divide up the subject matters of
their agreement. They might, for example, choose Giganticus to adjudicate and
enforce tort and property law, and Gargantua to adjudicate and enforce
contract law (include this meta-contract).  
  
Alternatively, if Giganticus is strong and Gargantua is wise, they might agree
that Gargantua should decide the cases regarding any subject matter (i.e. act
as a judiciary) and Giganticus should enforce them (i.e. act as an executive).
As another alternative , the giants could agree on the division of subject
matter jurisdiction betweem them, or divide between them adjudication and
enforcement, and force their agreement on Crusoe and Dalrymple.  
  
Each of these scenarios is a plausible one. None involve "the state", but each
involve rights and correlative duties as well as freedoms and correlative lack
of rights. The probability that the giants would enforce their own brand of
law, rather than just enforcing whatever Crusoe and Dalrymple agree to, casts
some doubt on Locke and other "social contract" theorists as providing an
actual history rather than an ideal of the formation of legal systems or
states. More likely is the model of Mancur Olson, in which "stationary
bandits" out-competed "roving bandits" in the coercively competitive business
of collecting taxes and thereby formed states (and, I'd add, formed other
kinds of political property rights as well). All fodder for future posts.  
  
Ref: Hohfeld, W. N. Fundamental Legal Conceptions as Applied in Judicial
Reasoning, ed. by W.W. Cook (1919); reprint, New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press, (1964).  
  
UPDATE: I have clarified my recasting of Locke's analysis and corrected a typo
pointed out by a commentor.

