  
Abstract money today primarily involves accounts and other computerized bits,
but traditionally came in the form of paper. The Chinese, who invented paper
money called it "flying money." Abstract money is worthwhile because the
dominant kind of money over human evolution, unforgeably costly commodities,
can be quite costly to store and transport compared to abstract documents. For
money the biggest costs of storage and transportation are typically not
mundane real estate or carriage costs, but active security threats such as
robbery and embezzlement.  
  
Abstract documents, unlike unforgeably costly commodities, require trust in a
human institution to enforce the abstract claims of value made in the
document. This enforcement, if effective, lets the recipient of the document
be confident that it can be converted into something of value, traditionally
an unforgeably costly commodity that backs the document. If the recipient of
the document wants to trade the document to third parties -- negotiate it --
this enforcement may also provide confidence to these third parties that they
too can receive something of value in exchange for relinquishing the abstract
claim.  
  
Enforcement typically came in the form of legal and reputation systems. For
example, the Medieval European law merchant enforced contracts and monetary
promises in the merchants' own courts, with remedies such as bankruptcy and
expulsion from merchant guilds. Bosses (principals) enforced orders against
their employees (agents), and there were also often family relationships
within firms that increased trust within the firm.  
  
In most modern legal systems, and in many traditional legal and merchant
reputation systems, credit money has come in two basic forms -- drafts, or
orders from a boss to his employee (in legal jargon, from a principal to his
agent) to transfer goods to a certain person, and notes, or promises to
transfer goods to a certain person. A draft was enforced privately, by the
ways bosses normally discipline employees; a promise to pay was enforced by an
enforcement agency, often a government, by reputation among merchants, or
both. Often the document reifying money that we will examine took on both of
these roles.  
  
The draft, in particular the warehouse receipt, is probably oldest form of
credit document. Warehouse receipts are issued to document the storage of
personal property in a warehouse. Typically, a warehouse receipt is an
acknowledgement that the warehouseman is holding the owner's goods. The
receipt acts as a title to the goods; transferring the receipt is as good as
transferring the goods. The receipt acts as an instruction to the
warehouseman's agent to release the goods to whoever presents the receipt.
Thus, it is more properly categorized as a draft (an order to an agent) than a
note (a promise to pay), although in some ways and in some legal systems it
has been treated as both.  
  
Another kind of draft is a bill of lading. This is a receipt for transported
goods, and an order for the transport agent at the other end to release the
goods to a person authorized by the shipper to receive them.  
  

> Description of illustrations(in order): Sumerican clay envelope c. 3,500
B.C., probably a warehouse receipt or a billing of lading; plate for Chinese
paper money, c. 1279 A.D., with recent print from that plate; private bank
note of the Bank of Scotland, 1716; Early Mormon private bank (Kirkland Safety
Society, Ohio, U.S.A.) note signed by Joseph Smith, 1837; private bank note
from a private road and bridge operating company (Delaware Bridge Company, New
Jersey, U.S.A.) 1838; warehouse receipt for silver with micro-barcodes 2002.

