The need to sue can be an expensive burden. A plaintiff often needs to go
through a very long and expensive legal process, the results of which may be
little or nothing due to the insolvency of the party sued.  
  
Because of this problem, large chunks of commercial law and practice -- and
especially the areas of mortgages involving real property, secured
transactions involving goods, and negotiable instruments -- deal with
allocating the burden of lawsuit. Generally, the burden of lawsuit over a
transaction should be shifted to the partie(s) who are more likely to breach
the legal obligations created by the transaction, or more likely to become
insolvent, or both.  
  
Creditors often use collateral to shift the burden of lawsuit to debtors.
Instead of having to sue to get their money, creditors simply repossess the
collateral, shifting the burden of lawsuit to the debtor. Creditors sometimes
also use a surety (e.g. a co-signer) to reduce the burden of lawsuit by adding
a target who is more solvent.  
  
Another way creditors shift at most of the burden of lawsuit is by having the
debtor sign a promissory note. The creditor can then sell the note to a third
party who is entitled to collect the note as a holder in due course, free of
most defenses to payment on the original contract. Freedom from most defenses
(such as fraud, failure to perform, etc.) to the original transaction makes
the debt owed by the debtor to the holder in due course very clear-cut, thus
greatly lowering the burden of lawsuit for the new creditor. The original
creditor benefited because it could sell this unburdened debt at a higher
price than a debt burdened by legal problems with the original transaction. If
the original creditor breached a contract with the debtor (for example by
failing to deliver promised goods), the burden of lawsuit is now on the debtor
to sue the original creditor: the debtor must pay the note regardless. (In the
United States, there are some recent consumer protection exceptions to this
general rule). If the debtor fails to pay the note, this is a very
straightforward lawsuit compared to the usual breach of contract, and thus
likely to be settled at little cost. Thus, the promissory note has shifted
most of the burden of lawsuit from the creditor to the debtor.  
  
At a more basic level, the burden of lawsuit is shifted by shifting actual
control as well as legal possession over objects of value. "Possession is 9/10
of the law." To this end, security technology and in particular smart
contracts will likely become very useful devices for shifting the burden of
lawsuit in commercial transactions.

