It pulls hundreds of times the g's over far less time than what I had in mind,
but I do seem to have helped inspire Lenape Fire Turtle and friends. Their ice
rocket is even reported to have stayed in one piece until it hit the pavement:  
  
  
  
Next Fire Turtle tried to make a pulse jet motor out of ice injected with
propane. Alas, the exhaust came out a hole melted in the side instead of the
hole intended. If you look closely at the start of the side view portion of
the video (the second half), you can already see the flaw in the casting where
the ice is thin and the hole will appear:  
  
  
  
Having looked ahead to a future when the economics and technologies become
propitious, my own proposal was to take a grinder to an ice cylinder floating
in space, melt the resulting ice flakes into water, and feed that liquid into
a solar thermal rocket engine. The small snow-cone machine would gradually eat
up most of the ice on the multi-year voyage from comet (or Ceres, or similar)
to market. Alternatively, ammonia might be extracted from the comet and stored
as a liquid inside a tank made from water ice, adding complication to the
extraction process but greatly increasing the efficiency of the rocket motor
and thus the mass of water ice, ammonia, or other comet stuff brought to
market. More explanations of these icy and muddy daydreams lie here. When I
was a kid in body as well as at heart I just stomped around in mudpuddles.  
  
The ice rocket could in that future eliminate the need to launch from earth
not just rocket propellant, but also propellant tanks -- or more precisely
substitute a much lighter coat of sealing paint and sun shade for the tanks. A
well-shaded vacuum can become extremely cold, preventing the ice from
sublimating away. After propellant, tanks are by far the heaviest and bulkiest
items that today must be launched out of our planet's deep gravity well, and
ice rockets could substitute native materials for both.  
  
Meanwhile, it's all just good clean terrestrial fun.  
  
P.S. I also like the search engine.

