anonymous: "users have no way of knowing how many tokens have actually been
issued (by the bank inflating the tokens, or the key being stolen)."  
  
This is quite true for digital cash as described in the cryptographic
literature, and as it has been implemented in ecash and lucre, and AFAIK as it
is still currently implemented. The issuer and clearer (in my terminology a
"mint" or "bank" is divided up into two potentially separate entities, the
issuer and the clearer) are trusted third parties, which means that they are
security holes that must be closed by means outside the digital cash protocol
itself.  
  
For digital cash or other blinded bearer certificates to be ecnomically viable
users have to get value out of the system, in terms of satisfying their
preferences for private and irreversible transactions, faster than the rate
inflation. There are, short of the stronger methods addressed below, but just
within the single-issuer/single clearer paradigm, ways for third parties to
audit the issuer and clearer and track the rate of inflation simply by posing
as customers or gathering sampling information from customers. This reputation
system puts a practical limit on the expected rate (or risk per unit time) of
inflation but is admittedly an inferior solution to those named below. Also
digital cash could piggyback on the reputation and gold redemption windows of
the gold currency issuers -- it would thereby be protected against inflation
to the same extent that the current insecure (in terms of privacy and
reversibility) gold currencies are protected.  
  
anonymous: "engineering cannot solve this problem"  
  
That's a preposterously strong claim given that you don't provide any evidence
for it, much less the proof you would need to actually demonstrate it. In fact
there are a number of candidates solutions. Google the following: "quorum
systems" (or just Byzantine replication generally), "secure property titles",
"remote attestation", "bit gold".  
  
Bit gold, for example, can be tied to digital cash through a redemption
window, as per the old free banking note issue and redemption system. As long
as the window keeps working users can have substantial confidence that the
system is working -- the temporal window you pointed out becomes much longer.  
  
Remote attestation and Byzantine replication are alternative and complementary
ways to distribute issuers and clearers and force them to run publically
verifiable code, so that a single clearer or even a small conspiracy of
clearers can't undetectably inflate the currency.

