This month has thrown off quite a bit of new information on Neanderthals and
on the possibility that they interbred with some of the humans that came out
of Africa. It's bound to stir up controversy.  
  
The first interesting recent study comes from extracting the remains of a
probable Neanderthal DNA from 38,000 years ago, copying it into bacteria, and
then sequencing it at leisure. (Query: do fundamentalists oppose this
procedure as a forbidden "cloning of a human"?). This bacterial-Neanderthal
chimera (actually, the Neanderthal genes are really just junk DNA from the
point of view of the normally functioning bacteria) is an improvement over the
traditional technique that apparently destroys the original DNA in the process
of sequencing it. Preserving the DNA is vital for this application:
Neanderthal DNA has been severely damaged by 38,000 years of chemistry and can
only be obtained with severe difficulty in small fragments.  
  
Large-scale statistical studies from these probable Neanderthal sequences
suggest that the number of genes we moderns derive from Neanderthals is few,
if any. In other words, all of us trace either nearly all or entirely all of
our ancestry from _homo sapiens_ originating in Africa c. 200,000 years ago
rather than to Neanderthals that originated some 700,000 years ago. Pretty
much what most scientists have thought for the last few decades.  
  
However, that does not mean humans and Neanderthals didn't interbreed, and it
doesn't mean that none of us got any important genes from them. There is some
fossil evidence from Portugal and Romania suggesting human-Neanderthal
hybrids. Even more startling is a study published this month showing that
about 70% of modern humans possess a gene for brain development (this paper
goes straight for the controversy jugular!) derived from an "archaic species
of _homo_ " rather than from our African _homo sapiens_ ancestor. Since the
time of "introgression" (cross-breeding between the archaic species and the
African-derived modern species, _homo sapiens_ ) was about 37,000 years ago,
and the gene is overly represented in Europe and Asia but uncommon in sub-
Saharan Africa (I warned you about controversy!), it's a good guess that this
gene was a "gift" from a sneaky Neanderthal to the second wave of modern
humans to have left Africa, the ancestors of most modern Europeans and Asians.
A gift that was positively selected -- it replaced its African-derived
alternative almost everywhere they were in competition -- and with which most
of us are now blessed. The Neanderthal DNA sequencing study shows that the
African genes won the vast majority of the other competitions.

