The D.C. Circuit has held that Congress cannot delegate lawmaking power to an
international organization. The case is a lawsuit brought by an environmental
group against the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for an alleged
violation of the Montreal Protocol. The group argued that the EPA violated
"decisions," or agreements that have been negotiated by party countries since
ratification of the Protocol, defining "critical uses" which would be exempt
from the general ban on the ozone-eating chemical methyl bromide. Some choice
quotes:

> If the “decisions” [further agreements made after the treaty was ratified]
are “law” – enforceable in federal court like statutes or legislative rules –
then Congress either has delegated lawmaking authority to an international
body or authorized amendments to a treaty without presidential signature or
Senate ratification, in violation of Article II of the Constitution. The
Supreme Court has not determined whether decisions of an international body
created by treaty are judicially enforceable. But there is a close analogy in
this court...we held that rulings of the [International Court of Justice] do
not provide “substantive legal standards for reviewing agency actions,”
because the rulings, though authorized by the ratified treaty, were not
themselves self-executing treaties. [citations elided]....  
>  
> A holding that the Parties’ postratification side agreements were “law”
would raise serious constitutional questions in light of the nondelegation
doctrine, numerous constitutional procedural requirements for making law, and
the separation of powers...  
>  
> To illustrate, suppose the President signed and the Senate ratified a treaty
with Germany and France to conserve fossil fuel. How this is to be
accomplished the treaty does not specify. In a later meeting of
representatives of the signatory countries at the United Nations, a consensus
is reached to lower the speed limits on all major highways of the signatory
nations to a maximum of 45 miles per hour. No one would say that United States
law has thus been made.  
>

The court makes an interesting distinction between using an international
organization's "decisions" to interpret ratified (and thus binding) treaty
language and enforcing them as law itself:

> Like any interpretive tool ... the “decisions” are useful only to the extent
they shed light on ambiguous terms in the Protocol. But the details of the
critical-use exemption are not ambiguous. They are nonexistent. The
“decisions” do not interpret treaty language. They fill in treaty gaps.

The court then makes a good analogy from contract law to treaty law:

> Article 2H(5) thus constitutes an “agreement to agree.” The parties agree in
the Protocol to reach an agreement concerning the types of uses for which new
production and consumption will be permitted [i.e. the critical use
exemption], and the amounts that will be permitted. “Agreements to agree” are
usually not enforceable in contract. (“A treaty is in its nature a contract
between . . . nations.”). And the fruits of those agreements are enforceable
only to the extent that they themselves are contracts. There is no doubt that
the “decisions” are not treaties. [citations elided]

The court goes on to interpret the language of the Montreal Protocol to be
consistent with the non-delegation doctrine, and thus as not authorizing
courts to enforce post-ratification "consensus agreements": they "are
international political commitments rather than judicially enforceable
domestic law."  
  
This is a great decision, not because it preserves "sovereignty," but because
it recognizes that a strong non-delegation doctrine is crucial to allocating
Constitutional powers where the Framers intended them to be allocated.  
  
For more on the non-delegation doctrine, see my paper origins of the non-
delegation doctrine. HT: Opinio Juris.

