james: _If the market discriminates between one item of bit gold and another,
they will be like collectibles - of uncertain value, not readily
exchangeable._  
  
I'm afraid this is a profoundly mistaken conclusion, but since it keeps coming
up I suspect gold sellers will keep trying to trash bit gold with it long into
the future. So even though I long ago refuted it, I'll keep trying to
communicate the proof.  
  
There is a perfectly objective, measurable, and inelastic supply curve,
completely derivable from the relative scarcity of bits (puzzle solutions) on
the week (or the day, or the hour, or the minute, if necessary) of their
publication. Arbitrage to set the different prices of different weeks (or
minutes) can be computerized on this basis. The demand curve, the demand for
puzzle solutions _for their monetary value_ , will be based on recognition of
the superiority of bit gold as a form of money that is more secure and has a
far less elastic (indeed, perfectly inelastic) supply curve than traditional
commodities such as precious metals. This demand curve will be the same
function of scarcity for all weeks (or minutes), so it won't affect the simple
scheme of automated arbitrage between epochs with different supply curves.  
  
_Early in human history, people used collectibles as money, with the value of
a collectible deriving in part from its [aesthetic value]_  
  
The "in part" part is crucial, as is the question of _why_ humans evolved such
aesthetic values. The value of gold today is almost entirely based on its
monetary value rather than mere decorative value. There are plenty of metals
that are as shiny as gold, but people don't demand them as a store of value or
medium of exchange because they are common. There are plenty of rocks that
look as good as diamonds, but "diamonds are a girl's best friend" because they
are hard to obtain and thus hold their value. It is their _secure scarcity_ ,
not their aesthetic features, that allows them to be more securely used as
money and thus gives them a monetary value far above the often trivial value
they have as an aesthetic object. Furthermore, the asthetic instincts to which
you refer, for example the instinct to collect shiny things, evolved just
because in the evolutionary environement they approximated an instinct to
collect scarce things, and to distinguish hard-to-find from easy-to-find
things, i.e. an instinct to collect objects of _monetary_ value, as I describe
here, in the "Evolution..." section early in the paper, and the "Attributes of
Collectibles" section late in the paper.

