Good question, Matt. I doubt we have enough information yet for a definitive
answer, but we know enough to shed some light on it.  
  
Lactose persistence arose multiple times elsewhere in the world, so we know
such mutations weren't astronomically improbable, but on the other hand
lactase persistence appears not to have arisen independently in any of the
many other pastoral regions of Eurasia besides perhaps Arabia, suggesting some
luck involved.  
  
DNA studies on burials now suggest that the European lactose persistence
mutation originated in central Europe, not in the current core region. So the
core region does not indicate origin so much as where the allele most out-
propagated the competing alleles. The grain/legume (with livestock also
important but secondary) model retained its dominance in southern Europe and
other centers of early civilization. There is even a cline in England with
Scotland more lactase persistent than than the English north or midlands,
which in turn are more lactase persistent than southern England. This,
alongside the north/south cline in continental Western Europe, suggests to me
that milk for adults was especially beneficial in harsher winters, although
that doesn't explain the lower levels of lactase persistence in northern
Russia and Asia.  
  
Figuring out when and by what stages northern Europe evolved from pastoralism
to quasi-pastoralism may be a hopeless task. Though it's safe to say that the
pre-Christian Germanic tribes, while far from being purely nomadic, had much
more roving bandit to their societies than the Christian ones.  
  
So the conversion (which also introduced other Latin institutions such as
prose writing and Roman-derived law) was probably a very important step on the
road from nomadic pastoralism to the advanced quasi-pastoralism that led to
the agricultural revolution. Thereafter we see a great rise in the use of hay,
a crucial innovation of advanced quasi-pastoralism, and a great elaboration of
the northern European long-distance food trade, corresponding to the more
secure property brought by Christian Germanic bandits who were far more
stationary than the pagan Germanic ones. n.b. for those not familiar with the
"bandit" terminology, Google ["Mancur Olson" bandit]. See also figure 3 of the
link to the great Koepke et. al. paper you provided, showing a great increase
in population density, especially in Central-Western Europe, starting not long
after the conversion of the core region to Christianity.  
  
But the northern bounds of the Roman Empire also suggest limitations to the
process: they didn't succeed in conquering Scotland, nor the lands east of the
Rhine or north of the Danube, and later succumbed to Germanic pastoralists,
the whole of Western Europe moving towards the more roving banditry of the
Germanic tribes and the Dark Ages, a pattern not reversed until all partly
roving warriors like the Vikings and Magyars who plagued Europe were converted
to a stationary lifestyle.  
  
So perhaps the best short answer at least for now is, "it's complicated." :-)
In other words some of all three of the factors you cite played a role.

