 _humans are a conglomerate of many specialized techniques rather than
something that is similar to AIXI.  
_  
  
A good thing, too, because "AIXI" (i.e. Solomonoff induction, a generalized
model of machine learning) is uncomputable. Even learning with no guaruntees
is harder than cracking public key crypto in the general case. To make
learning efficient, you need to have some already existing information about
the particular environment being learned, or similarly a learning algorithm
that is specialized for that environment. The more relevant information you
have, the better adapted the algorithm, the easier it is to learn the rest.
Which gives us an economy of different learners specialized to different kinds
of environments.  
  
As for humans, we are certainly quite good at some important mental tasks, but
there are also tasks we're relatively quite bad at. Exact memories typically
being among them. Birds that can remember where in a landscape thousands of
nuts are buried, the long-term memories of seals, animals with "photographic
memories", etc. each in their own ways have specialized mental abilities our
unaided brains don't typically have. And of course computers can memorize
trillions of numbers, on top of being able to do arithmetic billions to
trillions of times faster, and many other tasks that require boolean logic,
arithmetic, and the like. And I'm not even counting the many sensory inputs
our unaided brains lack, which before the advent of technological sensory
modes caused us to miss out on most of the information available in our
environment.  
  
None of that stops humans from still having the best overall package of
specialties, especially with the help of the technology we create, like those
computers. But there is no magical "general intelligence" that we possess and
other entities do not -- just a different package wrapped up in a brain with a
higher brain/body ratio, hands for our brains to create that technology, and
language that allows us to form some sophisticated social relationships that
are very different from those of other animals. A very good bundle of
specialties, but missing some pieces we'd really now love to have (like the
memories of computers), and certainly not "general intelligence", which ranges
from the astronomically inefficient to the uncomputable.

