You're quite right. I wonder as a kind of followup if there are not two more
major media effects to be considered:  
  
(1) I've described how European institutions of public timekeeping preceeded
and motivated the near-simultaneous invention of two technologically disjoint
inventions, the sandglass and the mechanical clock. Similarly, it's probably
the case that the market and decentralized demand for books beyond central
authorities (e.g. among literate nobles, rich merchants, and university
students as well as from the Church) helped give rise to a difficult to stop,
and rapidly spreading printing industry, one far more decentralized and harder
to regulate than China's.  
  
The explanation for why China failed to develop widespread book consciousness
until much later, despite having invented the printing press, may however be
more mundane, having to do with the large size of their alphabet, which
probably made type casting far more expensive than type casting for the Roman
alpabet.  
  
(2) Western Europe took advantage of the printing press to a far more
significant degree than Korea and China before it, and many regions after it,
probably due its decentralized and largely unregulated markets. The same
effect might have also influenced the earlier use of scribal culture itself in
subtly more productive directions. (After at least 1050. Before that, Western
Europe was far behind both India and China and most of Islam in almost every
category or by almost any measure). For example, there's probably nothing in
late medieval China that rises to the substantial innovation of commercial
institutions in northern Italy, and especially Genoa, between the 12th and
14th centuries.  
  
That statement has to be judged against the backdrop of our vast and highly
unfortuneate igorance of Chinese commercial institutional history, alas. We
can probably also learn a vast amount from why the early medieval Chinese
economy and institutional evolution so outpaced Western Europe and most of the
rest of the world's. As well  
However, we have far more information from Western European history, mostly
due to that printing press again, than we do from these equally important but
largely lost prior periods of institutional evolution.

