Way back in 1994 I wrote the following (the "keys" here were envisioned as
digital codes acting as car keys):  

> If a loan was taken out to buy that car, and the owner failed to make
payments, the smart contract could automatically invoke a lien, which returns
control of the car keys to the bank. This smart lien might be much cheaper and
more effective than a repo man.

I've since used this as one of the key examples of smart contracts, in
particular smart contracts that help enforce security interests (collateral).
Other kinds of smart contracts include digital rights management (for
copyright licenses), financial cryptography (for payment systems and other
kinds of financial contracts), price-sensitive controllers, and a wide variety
of other possibilities. More recently, some real-world examples of the "auto-
repo-auto" have appeared, and it is now becoming more common. Deborah Yao
describes some more of these:  

> Starter-interrupt devices are becoming a popular way for lenders to ensure
they get paid, and consumers seem willing to accept them to get into nicer
cars, use a smaller down payment and qualify for a lower interest rate,
according to device manufacturers.

>

> ...The companies make a variation of the same device: The units are
connected to the starter and emit a brief series of sounds or flashes of
light, days before the payment deadline. If the customer then makes a timely
payment, he or she can contact the dealer for a new code that will allow them
to operate the vehicle. Some devices are remotely controlled by dealers.

Note that the process is far more manual and that there is much more attention
to the user interface than I was thinking about in 1994. It's becoming
increasingly apparent that a good user interface is often key to good security
(phishing is another big example of this). Contracts are ultimately
relationships between people, so a smart contract protocol needs to go all the
way from end to end -- from person to person. Furthermore, as long as the
parties have access to a good legal system, making certain important steps
manual is a good idea if it increases flexibility and safety without too
substantially decreasing security or user friendliness.  
  
My thanks to Ian Grigg for pointing me to Yao's article.

