  
It's the eve of Independence Day here in the United States, celebrating the
American insurgents who broke from England. We did have some good inspiration
from the Old Countries, as described by this excerpt from a paper of mine:  

> In the 1560s, an “intermittent civil war” started between Protestants and
Catholics in France. On St. Bartholomew’s Day, 1572, encouraged by the
government authority, mobs murdered “as many as 10,000” Protestants, targeting
their leaders. The same year, the Dutch Protestants began their rebellion
against the Hapsburg monarchy. Soon thereafter, Theodore Beza, the successor
to Calvin, wrote about the right of rebellion and the need to control
government so that such rebellion would not be necessary. Beza’s ideas were
expanded by an anonymous author, probably the Huguenot Philippe due Plessis-
Mornay, in _Vindicae Contra Tyrannos_. (1579). “If kings commit
injustices…they become the enemy,” Plessis-Mornay wrote. But if individuals
determined for themselves when to revolt, the result would be violent anarchy.
It was, therefore, the role of the Estates and lesser magistrates to guard
individual rights against tyrants. According to constitutional historian Scott
Gordon, the Huguenots “extended their argumentation to encompass less extreme
conflicts between a prince and his subjects. Rebellion is exercised in
extremis, but more important are the constraints that operate in ordinary
times and bear upon a government that might feel quite secure against
insurrection.” The Huguenots and their successors stressed two ways of
controlling tyranny that remain crucial to understanding the non-delegation
doctrine today: first, control by distributing and checking power; second,
control by representation of interests. According to Beza, institutional
organs that represent the people “are established to check and bridle the
magistrate.”  
>  
>  John Locke elaborated on many of these ideas in his _Second Treatise On
Government._ Since humans are unjust towards each other without government, we
must form such a government through a compact with each other. We agree to
surrender some of our natural rights so that government can function to
preserve the remainder. “Absolute arbitrary power, or governing without
settled standing laws, can neither of them consist with the ends of society
and government, which men would not quit the freedom of the state of nature
for, nor tie themselves up under, were it not to preserve their lives,
liberties, and fortunes; and by stated rules of right and property to secure
their peace and quiet.” Power is also more dangerous if concentrated: “He
being in a much worse condition who is exposed to the arbitrary power of one
man who has the command of 100,000, than he that is exposed to the arbitrary
power of 100,000 single men.”  
>  
> When judicial or executive officers distort the law, with the result that
injuries go without remedy, the result is nothing less than a state of war.
“Where an appeal to the law and constituted judges lies open, but the remedy
is denied by a manifest perverting of justice and barefaced wrestling of the
laws, to protect or indemnify the violence or injuries of some men or party of
men, there it is hard to imagine anything but a state of war. For whenever
violence is used and injury done, though by hands appointed to administer
justice, it is still violence and injury, however colored with the name,
pretences, or forms of law," Locke wrote.

  

 **References:**

Scott Gordon, _Controlling the State: Constitutionalism from Ancient Athens to
Today_ (Harvard University Press 1999)

John Locke, _The Second Treatise On Government_ (1691)

