J. Thomas, the Romans didn't get past the Malthusian trap. While a tiny
fraction of their elites, as with many empires, became very wealthy and built
many spectacular monuments, their large populations of slaves and high-taxed
peasants had low standards of living (as I've shown on the graph). Their
Malthusian isocline was higher than, e.g. Italy before or after the Empire,
which given the mean standard of living was about the same meant their
population was higher than before or after. Their more advanced isocline was
probably due to better security of property, especially compared to the later
Dark Ages. But also important was having an extensive trade and transport of
grain around the Mediterranean, which between the early Empire and the fall of
the Western Empire they'd largely freed of pirates. They could transport grain
from areas of surplus to areas of shortage across a very wide area, which
land-locked or broken up governments could not do. Once these sea channels
(and the road network that was its necessary complement) deteriorated, so did
their Malthusian isocline. (I'll have more to say about the crucial role of
transportation in future posts). Stationary bandits that weren't replaced by
roving bandits came to act more like roving bandits, the isocline regressed
further, and Western Europe deteriorated into its Dark Ages.  
  
The British Empire was far more a consequence than a cause of what Britain did
to break out of the Malthusian trap, as I hope to detail in future posts. Note
in the diagram above their isocline is already making in percentage terms
dramatic progress in the 15th and 16th centuries, long before they'd developed
an empire. One important point to note is that, while foreign trade was
important to its overall economy, Great Britain actually didn't import more
than a small fraction of its food until the latter half of the nineteenth
century. Indeed, if we count the fact that it exported a great deal of wool
and wool goods, it was a net exporter of agricultural resources from the
Middle Ages until well into the 19th century, by which time they were much
more an industrial than an agricultural economy and could easily pay for the
food they imported with a small fraction of their manufacturing exports.  
  
Leonard, I briefly touched on Great Britain having a superior security of
property due to its geography here and here (hopefully the second link will be
up again soon).  
  
Great Britain's "moat" was necessary but not sufficient -- they also needed
relative political peace between the various cultures and factions on the
island, low rents/taxes on productive capital investment, laws that protect
property, and the ability to make agricultural innovations sufficient to take
enough advantage of their greater security of capital investments. All the
protection from foreigners is pointless if the local politicos destroy your
capital anyway.

