BTW, there were often restrictions on sales of franchises. In many cases, one
had to get permission of the grantor (often the king or higher lord) to
further grant (sell or give away) the property. The general idea (as with the
ban on selling the Crown itself) is that for coercive franchises market
efficiency is not the main goal, and often nothing like that is possible. The
main goal is to properly regulate and contain a coercive monopoly. So we
shouldn't expect to use the same property rules we apply to modern economic
property, where the main goal is market efficiency. I think we should consider
requiring jury approval of franchise sales.  
  
I wrote:  
 _We should prefer the former, more competitive solution unless the
competition would cause (as in the tax case) more problems than it solves._  
  
In this example one must guard against the cut-rate cruel-and-unusual death
penalty. There are three general ways to guard against such problems:  
  
(1) require all death penalty franchises to follow procedures banning cruel
and unusual methods of execution (this restriction is simply part of the
generic definition of the property right),  
  
(2) write procedural rules into the particular grant banning cruel and unusual
punishments, or  
  
(3) allow local juries to add restrictions to the local franchises.  
  
Methods (2) and (3) get undermined if there is competition with cut-rate
franchises not burdened by such restrictions, and so only works if there if
the franchise is monopolistically over capital crimes committed within San
Mateo County, but method (1) allows for competitive franchises since they all
must operate under the restriction.  
  
We can't, as we do with economic property and market competition, rely on
normal common law to prevent abuse, as the whole idea of a franchise is a
property right to violate, under certain conditions and following certain
procedures, what would otherwise be banned under the common law -- i.e. to
commit theft (distraint of goods and taxes), kidnapping (arrest and summons to
appear), killing (execution), etc.  
  
To allow competition we must envision every major possible abuse of such a
coercive power ahead of time and write it into the charter (property deed for
the franchise). If we know we can't do this, we have to go with as
monopolistic a solution as possible.  
  
N.B. breach of procedure that harms the defendant is a trespass against the
defendant (a wrongful death lawsuit), and that harms another franchise owner's
property rights is a trespass against that franchise owner. Repeated
violations could also be grounds for a _quo warranto_ proceeding where the
franchise escheats to its grantor. (The latter conditions are written into the
franchise deed as conditions on use of the franchise, much as is often done
with real property).

