I recently found a delightful new book, The Origins of Value: The Financial
Innovations That Created Modern Capital Markets, edited by Goetzmann and
Rouwenhorst. Besides the wonderful pictures (it doubles as coffee-table book),
it contains a variety of articles on the precursors and antecedents of modern
trade in stocks, debt, and financial instruments. Each article is (co-)written
by different noted authorities in the history of financial markets.  
  
Just some of the highlights: tallies, chirographs, Chinese paper money (a kind
of sad history paralleling the 20th century experience with government
currencies), the Roman publicani, Fibonacci on present value, securitization
of government debt in Venice and Genoa, the Dutch East India Company (VOC --
the first corporation whose stock was widely traded), a silly defense of John
Law (making some noteworthy economic observations justifies coercing and
defrauding millions?), and a perpetuity that financed a 17th-century Dutch
dike and is still being paid today.  
  
The book is biased towards finding antecedents of surface phenomena of modern
capital markets, and thus is narrower than a good history of economic
institutions would be. The importance of the legal idea of a corporation as a
"person" is briefly noted, for example, but the many tricky legal issues this
raises that must be solved before such an institution can become widely
viable, the shortcomings of Roman law in this regard (despite the publicani,
which are so poorly recorded in the historical record we lack many important
details on their legal structure and operations) are not raised. Nor are
contributions to corporate law of the Catholic Church, municipalities, and
guilds in the Middle Ages (not to mention Western law schools, which first
appeared then), long before Dutch East India Company, mentioned. Indeed, most
of the important legal issues that must be solved to make modern capital
markets possible are just not addressed, despite the vast documentary record
of legal codes and decisions from Babylon, Rome, medieval Europe, and other
places where such legal breakthroughs were made. Some important issues of
trust and security are raised or at least hinted at, but are usually not
explored in detail. The crucial role of accounting is given short shrift.
There is not a lot of economic theory and it doesn't go much beyond standard
financial economics, which may not provide a very good model many of the
ancient, high transaction cost eras discussed.  
  
These, however, are just grumbles about how reality always falls far short of
the ideals one can envision. After all, the subtitle says "...Financial
Innovations...", not accounting or legal or in general institutional
innovations that made modern capital markets possible. And I don't know of any
single book out there that explores so many episodes of ancient, medieval, and
renaissance financial history in such a detailed and colorful way.

