Science has revolutionized life since at least the age of exploration, through
the industrial revolution, and to an unprecedented degree in the 20th century.
Science generally, and physics in particular, got a vast boost in credibility
and in government funding following the ability of physicists to develop
weapons of unprecedented power in the Manhattan Project. Scientists and their
engineering brethren also developed modern electronics, sent men and machines
into the cosmos, and much else that would have seemed like miracles and
prophecy in prior centuries. Sciences such as psychology and evolutionary
theories of behavior have at least potentially revolutionaized our
understanding of ourselves. Now we have a large number of self-styled "social
sciences" that attempt to understand social behavior and societies through
scientific methods. Instead of priests prophecying and invoking miraculous
thunderbolts through mumbo-jumbo, our modern scientific priesthood helps
create real technology and tells us what to think about social systems and
political options by what seems to most people (and even to most scientists
outside the particular specialty in question) equally mystical mumbo-jumbo.  
  
This scientific elite is supposed to be all quite different from the
priesthoods of old because it is supposed to adhere to scientific methods
rather than superstition and dogma. The scientific method developed from
several sources, but one that is particularly interesting is the law of
evidence in medieval and Renaissance Continental Europe. In English law,
issues of fact were (and are) determined by a jury and the law of evidence is
all about the general biases of juries and thus what lawyers are and are not
allowed to present as evidence to them -- the basic rule to overcome juror
bias being that the relevance and integrity of the information must outweigh
its potential to prejudice the jurors. But in the neo-Roman law that dominated
the Continent from the Late Middle Ages to this day, juries were rare and
judges determined issues of fact as well as law. Thus there developed in
Continental law elaborate doctrines about how judges were supposed to weigh
factual evidence.  
  
Many Renaissance and Baroque era scientists, such as Galileo, Liebniz, and
Pascal, had legal training and this Continental law of evidence was reflected
in their methods. Most other early scientists had been exposed to law-derived
doctrines simply by attending universities many of whose doctrines derived
from the original universities which were essentially law schools. Soon,
however, the scientific community was independently evolving its own cultural
norms from this starting point. The ideal was to seek the truth. Experiment
became the _sine quo non_ of scientific credibility, along with mathmetical
rigor and important applications in navigation, engineering, and medicine.
Scientific funding came from a variety of sources; when governments funded
scientists they were expected to solve important problems such as those raised
by navigation of the seas, not merely to theorize. After the Englightenment
governments started to separate themselves from the social dogmas of their day
-- religions -- by making secularizing government and allowing freedom of
religion.  
  
Today a wide variety of important political issues are dominated by ideas from
scienitific communities (or at least communities that style themselves as
scientific): economists, climate scientists, and many others. But there is no
separation of science from government. Like the state-sponsored religions of
yore, most modern scientists derive both their education and their ongoing
livelihood from government funding of the theories with which they are taught
and on which they work.  
  
The old state-sponsored religions, and the resulting ideas about politics and
society, were funded by governments. Not surprisingly, as such governments
took over religion it became sacreligious to criticize the importance of
government generally and often specific governmental institutions in
particular. Under the nationalizers of dogma such as Henry VIII, who
nationalized the lands and priests of the Catholic Church in England, "render
under Caeasar" became more important than "render under God." Despite the
advantages of better funding these state-sponsored sects have been in decline
ever since governments stopped otherwise suppressing their competitors. The
state sponsored churches mostly taught uncritical worship of authority whereas
their private competitors added much more spiritual value to their adherent's
lives.  
  
The simplest science is physics. In some sense all other sciences are just a
variety of complex models of what happens when various kinds of complex
physical systems interact. Physics itself is the simple core of science. Thus
physics has been hailed as the "hardest" of the "hard sciences" -- sciences
where evidence trumps bias and the truth always outs sooner or later, usually
sooner, despite the biases of the individuals or institutions involved. Hard
scientists will often admit that the use of the scientific method in "soft
sciences" such as economics and other intersubjective areas can be problematic
and subject to great bias. If any science can rise above self-serving biases
and efficiently search for the truth, it should be physics.  
  
But the recent history of physics casts some rather disturbing shadows on the
integrity of even this hardest of sciences. Lee Smolin in _The Trouble with
Physics_ lays out a picture of an unprecedented group of geniuses, the string
theorists, who have wasted the last twenty years, largely at taxpayer's
expense, basically producing nothing except a vast number of highly obscure
but, in certain senses, quite elegant theories. The number of possible string
theories is so vast that string theory can, like "intelligent design," explain
anything -- it is unfalsifiable. It is "not even wrong," to take Wolfgang
Pauli's phrase about an earlier unfalsifiable theory of his era. String
theory's main rivals over the last two decades are not much better.
Theoretical physics for the last twenty years has mostly not been science at
all, but rather has been a large group of geniuses working on their own
cabalistic variety of sudoku puzzles at taxpayer expense in the name of
science.  
  
If this is the state of physics -- if even the hardest of sciences can be
taken over by a thousand-strong cabal of geniuses who produce nothing of value
except wonderful-sounding untestable theories whose main success has been in
garnering their community more of our tax dollars -- what hope do we have that
government-funded climate scientists, economists, and others purporting to do
science in areas far more complex or subjective than physics are actually
producing relatively unbiased truths? If we took a poll of theoretical
physicists, they might well have (up until quite recently) reached a
remarkable degree of "consensus" on the truth of string theory -- just as
global warming scientists have reached a "consensus" on global warming and (it
is implied) on the various bits of the speculative nonsense surrounding global
warming. Does such consensus mean us lay people should automatically believe
this consensus of experts? Or should we demand more? Shouldn't we rather, when
deciding on which theories or predictions of climate science or economics to
believe, act like a Continental judge or a common-law jury and demand to
actually see the evidence and weigh it for ourselves? Shouldn't we demand to
hear from the defense as well as from the prosecution? Experiment, multiple
points of view, and critical analysis are, after all, the real scientific
method -- as opposed to the ancient religious method of uncritically trusting
a single hierarchy of experts.  
  
Today's ideas about politics and society -- "scientific theories" if you agree
with them, "dogmas" if you don't -- are funded by the very governmental
entities that stand to benefit from increased government power. Just as it was
taboo under Henry VIII to "deny" the authority of either Christ or the King,
it has now become taboo in many of these modern intellectual communities to
"deny" a variety of scientific theories that are now supposed to be "beyond
debate," not just things like the basic idea of global warming caused at least
in part by anthropogenic carbon dioxide(which this author finds sound and
quite probable, but nevertheless believes should remain like all true
scientific theories open to further inquiry and debate) but also the variety
of extreme speculations that have grown up around it (regarding the severity
of storms, projections of droughts, floods, etc., most of which are
pseudoscientific nonsense).  
  
I'm hardly the only person who recognizes this problem with science. Indeed,
the opinion expressed above is quite mild compared to an increasing number of
conservatives who are coming to reject big chunks of good science along with
the bad -- not just the many florid speculations surrounding global warming,
but global warming itself, evolution, and other products of the expert
priesthood that threaten long-established (and often, ironically, highly
evolved) beliefs. Conservatives, and more than a few libertarians, feel that
modern science is becoming increasingly dominated by government funding and
thus becoming dominated by the interests of government in gaining more
dominance over our lives. With opposing ideas increasingly unable to access to
this research and education funding themselves, the easiest way for those
opposed to increasing state power to effectuate their beliefs is to reject the
theories of the scientific communities that promote this power.  
  
This, and not sheer cave-man irrationality, is why many conservatives are
increasingly throwing out the baby with the bathwater and rejecting science
generally. Both trends -- the increased government dominance over science and
the increasing rejection of science generally by those who oppose increased
government controls which scientists increasingly promote -- are disturbing
and dangerous. Science, once a method of weighing evidence that called for the
opinions of both prosecution and defense, is increangly being dominated by the
prosecution.  
  
We need a return to science with a diversity of funding and thus a diversity
of biases. This is much more important to the health of science than the
absolute level of funding of science. Reducing government funding of science
would thus _increase_ the quality of science -- by making the biases of
scientific communities more balanced and thus more likely to cancel each other
out, just as the biases of the defense generally cancel out the biases of the
prosecution. Where government does fund science, it should demand strict
compliance to the basic evidentiary principles of science, such as
falsifiability. All government-funded theorists should be required to design
experiments that can be conducted relatively inexpensively and in the near
future, that would strongly tend to verify or falsify their proposed theories.
More speculative theories -- such as those that rely on unobserved or worse,
unobservable entities -- simply should not be funded by governments. There are
a wide variety of private entities that are happy to fund such speculations;
this variety of funding sources is more important to reducing bias the further
one gets away from strictly controlled experiment. Any time government funds
science we should ask, does the utility of the potential discoveries and the
integrity of the scientific methods being used -- their ability to find the
truth even in the face of high institutional bias -- outweigh the potential
for the funding by one dominant source to prejudice the opinions of the fund
recipients?  
  
Science has benefited our lives in incalculable ways for many centuries.
Increasingly we inform our political decisions with the discoveries and
theories of science. As sciences ranging from climatology to economics play an
increasing role modern politics, this task of building a wall of separation
between government and science -- or at least not allowing states to sponsor
particular scientific theories at the expense of others with comparable
weights of evidence, and not allowing states to fund some biased speculations
at the expense of others -- is one of our most important and urgent tasks. If
we are to remain living in democracies we voters must learn once again to
weigh some of the evidence for ourselves, even if this means we gain our
understanding through the lossy communications of popularizers. It does not
work to trust a theory, no matter how scientific it may sound, based on a
"consensus" or "lack of debate" among experts who mostly derive their funding
from a single biased source. We democratic jurors must demand to hear from the
defense -- really from a variety of parties whose biases largely cancel each
other out -- rather than from just the prosection. We must redesign our
scientific institutions to minimize the biases that come from a single
dominant source of funding if we are to achieve good solutions to our
important problems -- solutions that are not dominated by the biases of that
dominant entity.

