"a": I love to debate too, and your apology is readily accepted.  
  
(1) My general disagreement in your look back at history is that you're cherry
picking a handful of good government projects and ignoring the baskets full of
bad ones. And you're ignoring the bad consequences of the programs you've
chosen in favor of the good consequences, and then claiming that discussion of
the bad consequences is somehow off topic. It is most of the topic. As if you,
unlike almost all of the billions of other people who've tried, can make
government work in its most ideal mode and magically avoid the nasty parts. On
this we are now just talking past each other; we each think the other is off
topic.  
  
(2) You're still not making specific proposals for global warming analogous to
the TVA and Manhattan Project examples. It's hard to rebut pious platitudes.
"Renewable energy"? I'm all for it and I encourage you to put your future
legal skills to work for a renewable energy company if you like. Specific
programs? Almost any specific government program will probably have major
problems, anticipation of which politicians can cleverly avoid by never
actually getting around to making specific proposals, until the day they
introduce and pass legislation that is then very hard to revoke. BTW, I
reccomend when they let you start choosing your classes to take a legal
drafting class. There you learn how specific and careful you need to be to
draft a good law, and why it's so easy for politicians to enact bad laws based
on wonderful platitudes.  
  
(3) What specifically do I fear? My main fear is not specific, it is general.
It's that governments will do what they have traditionally done best, namely
things like "kill people and break things" as soldiers like to say. In other
words, governments will naturally cause wide swathes of waste and destruction
in the pursuit of narrow goals. Here are some more specific problems that
could easily be a consequence of crash government programs to combat global
warming:  
  
* That hundreds of millions of people of poor and lower middle class and rural people will be denied adequate heating and transportation due to overzealous crash restrictions on fossil fuel industries. Even larger and more wasteful government programs will be created to address this, a problem government restrictions on "carbon" will  
have created in the first place.  
  
* That the nature of our current fixed infrastructure, ranging from work/residential district separation, to those interstate freeways, to big box stores, and a wide variety of other things, are designed around fossil fuels, and will be devasted by large crash restrictions to fossil fuels or radical and naive redesigns of this infrastructure. Such rapid and in retrospect probably very wasteful changes could throw tens of millions more people into joblessness and poverty and generally devastate the economy.  
  
* That vast political (but styled as "scientific") bureaucracies will arise that will be institutionally and in effect religiously committed to ideas that turn out to be wrong. They will be institutionally committed to proving they are right even though they are wrong. Their "customers" are not voluntary and there is no process analogous to bankruptcy, so we can't easily get rid of them. The general population may well come to believe their wrong ideas even though they are wrong, and even if they could be readily be demonstrated to be wrong, like a kidnap victim with Stockholm syndrome starts to trust their kidnapper, because unlike a customer they won't have significant separate choice in the matter, and besides, right or wrong the people with the wrong ideas have been given vast sums of money with which to convince us that they are right. And many of them will be "scientists" after all with degrees and everything. NASA is a good current example of this. It marvelously solved a very temporary problem (proving that our rockets were bigger than theres without actually nuking anybody) and has stayed on ever since with one phony futuristic promise after another, consistently wasting vast sums on dead-end projects and distorting our visions of the future. One can readily foresee the following reifications of your platitudes: a National Solar Panel Administration, spending vast sums to manufacture solar panels long after independent investigators have discovered solar panel manufacture is a major source of cancer, a National Fiberglass Administration pushing insulation far beyond what is best for economic efficiency and indoor air quality, a Wind Power Administration confiscating vast amounts of locally prized land and blighting it with hundreds of thousands of large, expensive, and ugly windmills that kill millions of birds, and so on. We could have laws requiring thermostats to be set at cold temperatures in winter and hot temperatures in summer, even though such temperatures can put at health risk or even kill outright a variety of people in a variety of states of frail health. We could have a National Climate and Weather Administrations that keeps insisting that global warming causes greater numbers and severities of storms even though the (small remaining number of) independent researchers have proved that it does not. For that reason government and the political process generally grossly overestimates the damage done by global warming, causing massive and unecessary economic waste, poverty, and suffering in the process of too quckly and radically reducing fossil fuels. (If you find that hypo implausible, keep in mind that something rather like it, but with an opposite set of wrong beliefs, is the case now: our government is currently, or at least has been until the most recent election, run by people who deny any sort of global warming or damage from greenhouse gases is occurring or will occur at all. Many of them also think evolution is a fraud and that stem cell research is evil. Why do you think it will automatically be people who are right, or who you agree with, who will be running government? Rather you should be planning government so that even if it's run by people who you disagree with, or who are just plain wrong, it will still work anyway).  
  
One probable consequence is vast tax hikes when, as is usually the case with
government projects, they go far over budget, produce far less value than
expected, or produce nasty side effects, assuming government even chooses to
deal with the nasty side effects at all. Remember, historically what
government does best is to "kill people and break things"; as we can see yet
again from Iraq. For government to actually put them back together again is
far more difficult. Government failures don't result in the projects get
cancelled but, pathologically, usually result in the project getting further
funding increases resulting in higher taxes or deficits (future taxes). The
only way to confidently prevent the massive waste and potential destruction is
to not start up the government program in the first place.  
  
The point is _not_ that we know that these bad things will happen, at least
not the specific ones about solar, wind, etc. (we can, alas, be fairly
confident about the cost overruns and the pathological political responses to
failed programs). The point is not that I'm right about the lack of a global
warming connection to storm severity.  
The point is that we _don't_ know for sure that about these things, and we
don't know that other unforeseen bad consequences won't occur. In fact, with
almost all government programs there turn out to be many bad consequences
unforeseen even by their opponents. Because of that and many other kinds of
uncertainty a centrally and politically managed program is an incredibly bad
way to go. Creating new agencies is in political practice an irreversible act
-- how many do you know that have been disbanded recently? And under a
supposedly anti-government party to boot? Just as the TVA could keep
destroying perfectly good land without paying a penalty for that destruction,
and the DOE could spew massive amounts of radioactive pollution into the
atmosphere and rivers at will, and just as NASA can keep spending vast sums
regardless of economic viability, these crash global warming programs, created
in a panic, will live on long after their useful life, creating environmental
destruction and economic waste far into the future.  
  
(4) As for subsidzing fossil fuels, I'm in favor of scrapping all overt and
discriminatory subsdisies in their favor. I'm not in favor of discriminatorily
scrapping government services that now apply equally to fossil fuels and other
segments of the economy. I am certainly not in favor of re-instituing these
same kinds of piece-meal corrupt subsidies but simply in the other direction
in favor of "renewable energy." The only kind of discrimination against fossil
fuels I'm in favor of is one of a very general nature directly related to
global warming, such as a carbon market or carbon tax. I'm in favor of
starting, gently at first, to restrict carbon, probably with a market and if
that turns out to not work then with a tax, or with markets for some kinds of
carbon and taxes for some other kinds. For either taxes or markets the crucial
issue is to properly measure greenhouse gas output and account for it in
weighs directly based on the reasonably expected and certain damages from
global warming rather than on political selfishness. That's a tall order but
we've got to tackle it. Once the system of carbon markets and/or taxes is
debugged the noose can be tightened as fast as people and industries and
technologies actually adapt, but no faster, and there you have a universal and
effective solution to the global warming problem with minimal political risk
and free of endless pointless political debates over which technologies are
best.  
  
BTW, good luck with your second semester in law school!

