Alas, I left a big misimpression. While establshing a new kind of legal
protection for these ideas might be interesting in its own right -- but quite
probably would work out badly for the reasons A points out -- that wasn't at
all my motivation for suggesting this new kind of "patent". My motivation is
simply to use patent-like criteria, but substantially altered as suggested, to
evaluate theoretical technologies for the purposes of making policy decisions,
e.g to figure out how to respond to global warming and to figure out what
kinds of science and R&D to fund.  
  
The question is to what extent policy makers should take these futuristic
proposals seriously -- for example should we take Drexler's scenario seriously
when making decades- or even centuries-long projections or plans to respond to
global warming? My short answer is that we should only take it seriously if
but only if it is specified in an imminently falsifiable manner.  
  
I'm not sure what you mean when you say that renewable energy technologies are
"fairly well bounded," but it doesn't sound right. There are major
uncertainties in many of them that reside in one of those quite unpredictable
arts, chemistry, as does the core of Drexler's proposals. Indeed Drexler's
proposal might be less uncertain because it involves mostly one big chemical
uncertainty (the mechanosynthesis question) surrounded by quite a whole lot of
two quite more predictable arts, mechanical and software engineering. It has a
probably very big payoff (if it works) rather than a very large number of
uncertainties with small payoffs. Granted, the Drexler uncertainty could
easily end up being that it doesn't work at all while we already know many
alternative technologies work somewhat well -- if that's all you meant by
well-bounded then I agree.  
  
VC's aren't going to invest in things that they can't imminently build --
you'd need to have actual legally enforced theoretical tech patents for that,
and even then they probably wouldn't bite and would deter other actual
implementors as you point out. The only path I can see to putting private
money into theoretical technology, besides the charity model of Foresight/IMM
etc. (not much money there) might be prediction markets as I suggested in my
previous comment, to the extent if any those pan out for the purpose of
betting on future uncertainties.

