Daniel: _how (and where) does he propose to conduct experiments with such
things?_  
  
This is a tough one, because one needs to be somewhere without a superior
legislature that effectively claims legislative sovereignty. A "grant" that
can be revoked at the whim of a legislature is not really a grant, not a
property right, just a revocable delegation. With a political property right
only a _quo warranto_ trial before an independent judge and jury for
aggregious and repeated breaches of procedure should be grounds for
forfeiture.  
  
There was a good discussion of the sovereignty vs. property rights problem
during the American Revolution by Samuel Adams (yes, the guy on the beer
bottle). The Massachusetts legislature was defending its political property
rights under their colonial charter from the claims by Parliament of sovereign
power. Sovereign powers cannot credibly commit to protect property rights,
especially not the ones they most covet, like political property rights and
"commanding heights" industries. It's no surprise that legislative sovereignty
combined with voting by those who owned little or no property soon led in most
places to de facto or de jure nationalization of "commanding heights"
industries like heavy industry and health care. Sovereign governments cannot
credibly commit to protect from themselves property rights they covet.  
  
Unfortunately, the same kind of problem had occurred with the legislatures
Adams defended vis-a-vis the political property rights held by others within
the jurisdiction of said legislature. (A rich culture of courts baron, courts
leet, views of frankpledge, etc. in colonial Maryland ended up being destroyed
by the Maryland legislature, for example).  
  
In theory the Takings Clause should apply to political as well as economic
property. But even modern defenders of the Takings Clause like Justice Scalia
seem to define, in the Romanist manner, "property" as economic property only.  
  
So find "us" someplace without a sovereign government, or some place with a
strongly enforced Takings Clause that includes political property, and there
"we" can do "our" experiments. :-)

