There are many great ideas that have been worked on in the cryptographic
theory community that I've long wanted to see implemented in practical tools.
Two of these, mathematically deniable authentication and forward secrecy, have
now been implemented along with encryption by Ian Goldberg and Nikita Borisov
to create the off-the-record messaging software OTR. Now you can have a
conversation on the Internet as if it was just you and your buddy on a golf
course. You do have to trust that your buddy on the golf course is not wearing
a wire, and here Alice has to trust that Bob is not recording the conversation
and vice versa.  
  
With mathematical deniability, even if your chat buddy records the
conversation, third parties cannot mathematically prove that it was you doing
the chatting. This is of limited practicality for legal purposes unless you
use OTR via an onion router or similar: otherwise there is enough associated
log data to prove Bob's identity in court even if mathematically it could be
forged. Even an onion router won't save you if you leave identifying
information in the actual conversation and your chat buddy records the
conversation. This is because the laws of evidence typically put the burden of
proving that such recorded data was forged on the person it is being used
against. Nevertheless, in the normal course of operations presumably OTR lives
up to its name and does not record the conversation, and your chat buddy would
have to go way out of his way to make it do so.  
  
Of more practical use is the forward secrecy, which means that if your chat
today is recorded by a third party in the encrypted form over which it is sent
across the Internet, and that third party discovers your chat key in the
future, that key can't be used to compromise the recorded but encrypted
message. "Forward secrecy" means the key you used was destroyed after use,
(like on Mission Impossible but automatically instead of with the self-
destruct sequence drama), and even if future key(s) are compromised they can't
be used to reconstruct the current key, and thus can't be used to decipher the
current chat session.  
  
This presentation gives a good overview of the messaging software's rationale
and the basics of how mathematically deniable authentication and forward
secrecy work. It points out that the law endorses off-the-record phone
conversations: normally and in most jurisdictions recording phone
conversations without consent is illegal. Cryptography, for the limited
problems it actually solves, is far more secure than the law.

