Cell phones can be used to monitor and pay for parking. This system and this
one are pretty clumsy in terms of all the gratuitous user input required, but
as has occurred with prepaid cell phones I expect this to become quite a bit
more user-friendly in the future. It will be very nice to be able to top up
the parking meter without having to return to the car.  
  
As usual remember that any information recorded (here, where and when you
park) "can and will be used against you." For example it can generally be
subpoenad for use in court, as also occurs with credit card records, phone
records, and automated toll systems. My old boss David Chaum, his student
Stefan Brands, and others in the advanced cryptography community have designed
many protocols that would preserve privacy in these scenarios, but the
deployers of these technologies are usually not terribly interested in your
privacy. Your recourse -- keep using physical cash, and take the trouble to go
back to your car to check and stuff your parking meter.  
  
In my original writing on smart contracts I talked about trading derivatives
and constructing synthetic assets with low transaction costs:  

> Very complex term structures for payments (ie, what payments get made when,
the rate of interest, etc.) can now be built into standardized contracts and
traded with low transaction costs, due to computerized analysis of these
complex term structures. Synthetic assets allow us to arbitrage the different
term structures desired by different customers, and they allow us to construct
contracts that mimic other contracts, minus certain liabilities. As an example
of the latter, synthetic assets have been constructed that mimic the returns
of stocks in German companies, without requiring payment of the tax foreigners
must pay to the German government for capital gains in German stocks.

A bit later I figured out that the primary barrier to such activity is mental
transaction costs. These costs throw a monkey wrench into what is otherwise
the very good idea of consumer derivatives. One can imagine a wide variety of
consumer derivatives, such as buying insurance against air fare changes and
the growing business of selling sports tickets based on personal seat licenses
(PSLs). I have sketched some possible solutions to the mental transaction
problem, such as the market translator. The main problem is designing an
automated agent that can figure out user preferences without bothering the
user -- usually by recording and analyzing the user's normal behavior. If this
can be fully automated the bottom drops out, so to speak, and even nanobarter
becomes possible.  
  
Smart contracts, based on digital property, open up a vast new space of
possibilities. Many of the digital machines you own can obtain good
information about your usage and their own status, from which they could at
least crudely estimate what you want to buy. Take parking, for example. A
suitably smart car and parking meter system should be able to figure out where
you want to park and how much you want to pay for it, with minimal user
intervention. I'm not talking anything like "AI" here, just computerized cars
and parking meters that have sufficient sensors, can communicate with each
other, and use known algorithms. As you are driving down the street, you tell
your car that you want to find a parking place. The price of open parking
spots ahead starts popping up on your dashboard. You choose and agree to pay
the fee by simply parking in the spot.  
  
Along with this future urban lifesaver, parking spot derivatives would be very
useful. For the same reasons as stadium owners sell PSLs -- to receive revenue
up-front to help pay the cost of building the infrastructure -- owners of
parking spaces could sell parking space licenses (PSL again, oops :-). The
owner of the PSL, in turn -- or said owner's car acting as his agent -- could
sell the hours or minutes that the car is not using. You could buy a PSL and
thereby reserve that sweet spot right next to your downtown office for the
year. Then sell off the parking rights for the weekends. You could reserve a
spot next the your favorite club and sell off all the times except Thursday
through Saturday night. And if you are away from the office or staying in for
the evening, your car's market translator can price and offer the space and it
will become open and start popping up on driver's dashboards.  
  
This kind of thing is just the tip of the iceberg as far as the potential of
smart contracts is concerned.  
  
Finally I will report on a digital cash system from no less than our frequent
commentor Daniel Nagy. Nagy makes the following observation:  

> While everyone with a cellular or a touch-tone telephone, a web-browser or
email client in its readily available, out-of-box configuration is able to
transmit short messages (up to a few hundred bits), performing complex
calculations involving strong asymmetric cryptography requires additional
tools which not everyone possesses or can afford to run. The fact that it is
impossible to transact without performing complex calculations in real time is
a far more serious obstacle than the need to contact the issuer for each
transaction.

This is an interesting approach, but I suspect may be correct only in the
limited sense that these devices and software don't come built-in with the
particular cryptographic protocols needed for strongly private cash (e.g.
Chaumian blinding). But they don't come built-in with digital cash software
either. Thus, the main advantage of Nagy's scheme, which may or may not make
up for its reduced privacy features, comes from the ability to use it without
having to install any extra software at all -- to just, for example, cut and
paste the cash from an e-mail where you received it from one person to an
e-mail where you pay it to another. Your word processor can be your wallet. If
this is an important use-case, then Nagian cash may succeed where Chaumian
cash failed.  
  
Another payment system of note is WebMoney, which recently started up a gold-
backed currency, a competitor to the troubled e-gold. (HT: Financial
Cryptography)

