Bowery quoting Fisk: _A border is not a property boundary; it is a demarcation
of legal jurisdiction._  
  
Under the monarcho-franchise system I described in my paper, jurisdictions
_were_ property, and so jurisdictional boundaries were also property
boundaries.  
  
Popularly we treat property in land as if it all came in one generic variety,
but even under modern property law that is not true. Thus there can be
estates, sub-estates, and so on. There's no contradiction between having
boundaries of larger properties and also having boundaries of smaller
properties contained within them. And these boundaries can mean different
things depending on the kind of estate involved. A jurisdictional estate can
encompass a number of economic estates, for example, and the borders of each
have different legal consequences.  
  
That said, there is nothing more important to liberty than reducing exit
costs. As Daniel Nagy points out, this also argues towards reducing entrance
costs -- although I do draw a distinction between the two. See my debate with
Daniel Nagy at the above link.  
  
To briefly summarize my position, I think that property owner restrictions on
residents or guests leaving the premises should be highly discouraged, and
indeed generally constitute kidnapping. This applies at any scale. Thus all
forms of serfdom and national citizenship with restrictions on emigration that
tie people to land are highly destructive of liberty.  
  
The right of an owner to exclude people, on the other hand, should be very
high for smaller properties and less so far larger (jurisdictional)
properties. A jurisdictional property that restricts entrance also restricts
the freedom of association of the jurisdiction's inhabitants. If an individual
desires to live and raise their children among "their own kind", whatever kind
that is, the property policies or deeds that implement these associational
preferences should be implement far more at a local level (for example with
restrictive property deeds) than at a national level. Thus for example I favor
discriminatory covenants on single lots and neighborhoods that the U.S.
Supreme Court has struck down under the fraudulent theory that these
constitute "government action" and thus violate the Equal Protection Clause.
Dr. Paul tends more than the other candidates to favor such local approaches,
but even he seems to be caught up with the dominant paradigm that sees
immigration as primarily a national issue. To the extent he does that I
largely part ways with him -- at such a large scale, I am for open borders.

