Justice John Paul Stevens has riled up law professors everywhere by
reiterating the traditional doctrine of the common law, namely that the case-
by-case decisionmaking that has given rise to the common law, as well as other
precedent-based law such as interpretation of the United States Constitution,
is a process of discovering something that already, in a Platonic sense,
exists:  
  

> [T]he source of a "new rule" is the Constitution itself, not any judicial
power to create new rules of law. Accordingly, the underlying right
necessarily pre-exists our articulation of the new rule.

  
This contradicts the modern academic dogma of "positivism" in which the common
law is made, not discovered, and therefore cannot be said to exist in any
sense until the decision comes down. This is associated with another dogma,
"realism", in which judicial decisions are largely just, as with legislation,
exercises in political power.  
  
Legal academics make far too much out of the "made" vs. "discovered"
dichotomy. We can see that by looking at the supposed distinction between
"discovering" a law of science and "inventing" a new piece of technology. If
it's possible to make a strong and important distinction between "discovering"
and "making", we should be able to do so here. Yet our patent system would not
have been able to transition so smoothly to being able to patent new breeds of
plant or new strands of DNA if this distinction were so clear. In patent law
the distinction between a "discovered" law and a "made" invention can be as
trivial as the distinction between a "discovery" that a high level of a
certain hormone correlates with a high risk of a certain disease and the
"invention" of a test that allows one to detect the high hormone level and
algorithmically (or perhaps even mentally -- it's unresolved law) conclude
that one is at serious risk of the disease. In other words, no serious
difference at all -- the test apparatus and the mental or algorithmic step was
how the discovery was made. To make the discovery is to make the invention,
and vice versa, and the idea that there is an strong and important distinction
between the two here is risible.  
  
There are thus cases in which the distinction between making and discovering
is trivial. But we can readily and fruitfully think of all invention as
discovery. What was more important to inventing the first automobile: the
physical making and combining of its parts, or the discoveries of ways make
and combine them (in this case, discovering what are the better and worse ways
to combine an internal combustion engine with a carriage)? One can discover
better and worse ways of making things just as one can discover new continents
or planets. That, and not whether the physical machine has actually been
built, and thus can be said to now physically "exist", lies at the heart of
invention. Furthermore, there is a Platonic sense in which these better or
worse designs already exist, because the basic laws by which they operate
already exist: the designs be deduced from the laws of physics and the history
of the part of the universe in which it is desired that they operate. In
practice, it this process of discovery requires its own empirical tests: build
the machine, try it in the various desired environments, tweak the machine to
make it work better. As with discovery those laws themselves, inventors
hypothesize which designs are better or worse and test them against reality.
They don't exercise their will and arbitrarily decide which machines will work
better and which will not.  
  
So too, common law is a painstaking way of discovering and making better law,
case by case, dispute by dispute, piece of evidence by piece of evidence. For
machines there is a Platonic "environment space", the set of environments we
desire those machines to work in. As we explore new environments we discover
new ways to make machines work better in them. In common law, there is a
"facts space", a Platonic space of possible unique disputes, each with its own
unique set of facts. It is not possible to explore more than a miniscule
fraction of the facts space.  
  
Instead of the hubristic exercise of waving one's hands calling for "Change"
and then drafting broad legislation, the ultimate consequences of which are
usually unknown, common law judges tweak the common law. In each case they are
discovering a better way in which the law can be made. Just as there are
empirically better and worse machines, so there are empirically better and
worse laws. If the law applied to the facts of this case is unjust, it needs
to be tweaked. Not repealed or overruled, as the absolutist minds of
positivists would have -- but tweaked -- by a shade of meaning or an exception
for a new situation. To repeal a rule of common law insults the combined
wisdom of several previous courts and a variety of cases with their own large
bodies of evidence not before the current court. It's like an octopus
declaring that, based on his discovery that wheeled vehicles don't work on the
ocean, that they won't work on land either, despite many landlubbers who've
reported that wheeled vehicles work on land just fine. The principles of
precedent or _stare decisis_ allow the law to evolve towards worker better in
an ever wider variety of disputes, even though only the facts of one case can
be observed at a time.  
  
So there is no dichotomy -- judges both make law and discover law. By not
doing so in broad brushstrokes, they can avoid doing the broad unintended
harms that legislation usually causes. Legislation purposefully disrupts
previously existing legal rights and duties wholesale. Proper common law
precedent -- any precedent that should be respected -- never should do this.
Instead it should be clarifying the nature of previously unexplored
territories of the facts space, the space of possible disputes, and tweak the
law so that it works better in the newly explored part of the facts sapce.
Incremental discovery of better law justifies the prohibition against _ex post
facto_ laws applying to legislation in a way that it does not apply to common
law making.  
  
N.B.: the fact that scientific discoveries are called "laws", by metaphor to
human laws, should clue us in as to what people generally thought about the
nature of law at the time of the scientific revolution, i.e. from the
Renaissance through the Enlightenment, and including the drafting and
ratification of the U.S. Constitution.

