Under the franchise philosophy, jurisdictions and other organs of government
large and small are property. In a monarchic franchise system ownership of
jurisdictional properties tends to be by individuals, whereas in a republican
franchise system ownership of such properties tends to be by corporations.
There is no such thing as sovereignty or "the" government, but instead a wide
variety of property rights to exercise specific political powers that may be
bundled, or not, in a wide variety of ways. The rights, duties, powers, and so
on of persons in franchise systems are defined in property deeds, often called
charters.  
  
In a franchise system, it follows that jurisdictional boundaries are a kind of
property boundary. This does not, however, mean that these boundaries should
be treated in the same was as the popularly understand generic property in
land is treated today. For example, it does not automatically follow that one
of their features should be a strict right of exclusion.  
  
Popularly we treat property in land as if it all came in one generic variety,
but in fact properties (called in law "estates") can come in a wide variety of
forms. There can be estates, sub-estates, and so on. There's no contradiction
between having boundaries of larger properties and also having boundaries of
smaller properties contained within them. And these boundaries can mean
different things depending on the kind of estate involved. A jurisdictional
estate can encompass a number of economic estates, for example, and the
borders of each have different legal consequences.  
  
There is nothing more important to liberty than reducing exit costs. As Daniel
Nagy points out in the debate at this link, this also argues towards reducing
entrance costs -- although I do draw a distinction between the two.
Restrictions on their residents or guests leaving the property should be
highly discouraged, and indeed generally constitute kidnapping. This should
apply at any scale. Thus all forms of serfdom and national citizenship with
restrictions on emigration that tie people to a territory, whether economic or
jurisdictional, are highly destructive of liberty.  
  
The right of an owner to exclude people, on the other hand, should be very
high for smaller properties and less so far larger (jurisdictional)
properties. A jurisdictional property that restricts entrance also restricts
the freedom of association of the jurisdiction's inhabitants. If a family
desires to live and raise their children among "their own kind", whatever kind
that is, the property policies or deeds that implement these associational
preferences should be implement far more at a local level (for example with
restrictive property deeds) than at a national level. Thus for example I favor
the right to enforce discriminatory covenants on single lots and neighborhoods
that the U.S. Supreme Court has struck down under the fraudulent theory that
these constitute "government action" and thus violate the Equal Protection
Clause. But on the scale of a large "nation" such as the United States, I am
for open borders, unless the border restriction is due to a compelling reason
of security that cannot be handled on a local scale.  
  
(This text is based on a comment I made in a prior post).

