munin,  
  
I've heard and read it from several news sources over the last few months,
including here:  
  
"The divergence between CBOT futures and the underlying commodity is so great
that some grain merchants have stopped bidding for new crops, said Niemeyer, a
member of the National Corn Growers Association board. Others won't guarantee
a price for more than 60 days....  
  
The price gap should converge when futures contracts expire and deliveries are
settled. Instead, the average premium for CBOT wheat has quadrupled in two
years to 40 cents a bushel, compared with 10 cents the prior five years, McNew
said."  
  
While I'm here, I should note my utter chagrin that a number of influential
folks have _almost_ reached the same conclusion as I, namely they've concluded
that "speculation" not fundamentals are driving most of the commodities rise.
But they stop there, repelled in horror by the idea, and don't take it a step
farther -- ask _why_ this "speculation" is going on. A good clue comes from
those responsible for the biggest piece of it -- retirement funds. Retirement
funds have long been heavy, relative to other kinds of funds, on less volatile
(over  <15 year periods) investments like bonds. But bonds are mostly
denominated in dollars. With the threat of dollar inflation (obvious both from
recent Fed activity as well as the history of the dollar in the 1970s) they
have a fiduciary responsibility to protect their investors' retirement nest
eggs by hedging bond positions with commodities baskets. And that is just what
they have been doing.  
  
(I suspect a similar explanation is behind much of the high Chinese demand --
but that rather than buying futures they are actually stockpiling commodities,
including cutting back on production of their own native minerals, to hedge
their peg to the U.S. dollar, their massive dollar earnings from exports, and
their heavy investments in U.S. Treasuries, all of which are vulnerable to
dollar drop or inflation -- but I don't know where data on such stockpiling
activity might be readily available).  
  
Many of these retirement funds (who have been the dominant commodity index
fund "speculators") can be politically influential. I wish, for the sake of
the retirees they have a duty to protect, they would defend themselves
politically against the insane proposals to restrict or ban commodity index
funds. Those seeking to save for retirement have perfectly good and strong
reasons for investing in commodity indices: they don't want to see their
retirement funds eroded away by inflation, as happened to millions of seniors
in the 1970s. Commodity indices have allowed people to construct retirement
portfolios hedged against inflation, and this is an incredibly valuable thing
both for the retirees and for the society on which said retirees will be less
dependent. Instead of attacking the fever by shutting down the immune system,
it is the original cause of the problem, the Federal Reserve, that needs to be
addressed. It needs to put a higher priority on fighting inflation, and it
needs to use leading indicators (e.g. commodity prices) far more than trailing
indicators (e.g. CPI, PPI) in this task. (I understand of course that the
credit crunch has been a very good reason for the Fed to "print dollars." That
doesn't change the fact that the Fed is smack dab in the middle of the causal
chain that has led to the commodities boom).  
  
I should also say that it's certainly possible that some or much of the boom
is a bubble. There is no easy way to gauge just how much retirement funds and
others seeking to hedge inflation need to allocate to commodities baskets in
order to optimize their portfolios, because it depends greatly on future Fed
behavior. On the one hand we know that hyperinflation is a historical
possibility; on the other hand the farther commodity prices go up (and they
have gone up very far indeed) without corresponding inflation in other goods
and services, the more downside price risk there is in commodities. It's
certainly true that commodities have become a far riskier, i.e. more volatile,
investment than they were three years ago, and that puts a severe limit on the
proportion of an investment portfolio it makes sense to devote to commodities.
It is often the case that economically efficient bull markets become
overextended into wasteful bubbles, it being hard to tell how large of a price
increase is actually warranted, and we may be seeing some of that now.

