 _described an effect in which monetary standardization is the result of a
pattern of subjective rational decisions which are not dependent on
transaction costs._  
  
Good grief sir, I have proven three times now that your argument is
preposterously flawed. You most certainly did assume the existence of a
crucial transaction cost, a point you have not even tried to refute, and thus
you have proved nothing of the sort you are claiming. Please read what I wrote
all over again (for the first time?) and get back to me. You also should
probably bone up on the definition of "transaction costs." And please stop
claiming that you have proven something you so clearly have not.  
  
 _In any other commodity, a stockpile of 40 or so years of production would
almost certainly lead to a complete cessation of new mining, not to mention a
much lower price._  
  
Gold has a higher ratio of monetary value to consumption value, and thus of
stockpile to destructive consumption, than any other commodity. Not a big
mystery, it (and silver) were traditionally used for money, and still are the
first choice for those seeking to use a commodity as money. The big stockpile
indicates an extraordinary ratio of monetary value to industrial consumption
value (probably in the hundreds or thousands for gold), it doesn't demonstrate
the absence of monetary value in other commodities. Right now I'd very roughly
estimate the ratio of monetary value to consumption value for oil to be
between 2:1 and 3:1, for example. (i.e. the price would be only 33% to 50% of
today's price were it not for the demand for use of oil as a store of value
and transaction hedge).  
  
 _On the other hands, many stockpiles are at historic lows, which argues
against a monetary effect._  
  
No, it argues for inelasticity of demand and high storage costs. And many
inventories have grown without declines in prices. Furthermore, for oil and
other mineral "futures" the inventory is in the ground, and hasn't shrunk.  
  
 _t is not rational for commodity investors to diversify across gold, silver,
palladium, wheat, copper, etc. The rational strategy is to buy only gold._  
  
Well, no. It is rational to diversify, as I have already argued, and that is
in fact what we see: we see massive runups in commodity prices in reaction to
expanded money supply without any corresponding big changes in the
technological/geological conditionsn of supply or in industrial demand.

