Congress is going crazy over commodities, and especially over oil. They are
convinced that we have a commodities bubble, so that all they have to do is
smash down their boogymen, "the speculators", and all will be hunky dory. They
are convinced of this because those supply/demand curves in the first chapter
of our Econ 101 textbook no longer seem to be working for commodities.  
  
This article provides an overview of the state of the commodities markets --
follow the links for more explanation of the various topics.  
  
Those supply/demand curves in the first chapter of your Econ 101 textbook
assumed that goods are sold for some fix standard of value, a currency. But
under floating currencies, which the world has had since the U.S. went off
gold in 1970, there is no fixed standard of value. When trading commodities,
supply and demand for the _currencies_ they are traded for must now be taken
into account. A long commodity position is also a short currency position, and
vice versa. Furthermore, _expectations_ about _future_ supply and demand for
currencies must be accounted for. Under floating currencies and a free market
in commodities, commodity prices, especially for commodities like oil and gold
where the stockpile (whether below or above ground) to production ratio is
very high and storage costs low, are highly volatile – a small change in
inflation expectations causes a very large change in commodity prices. The
commodities themselves start to act like gold: to take on monetary functions
such as a store of value or a hedge for currency-denominated debt. The logical
emergence of money from barter is taking place every day as commodities come
to serve these monetary functions better than floating currencies.  
  
The critics complain that commodities markets, no longer reflecting Econ 101
supply and demand, are no longer providing reliable price signals. In fact
commodity prices still are reflecting Econ 101 supply and demand, but this
often tends to get buried in the noise of the much larger price changes caused
by changes in inflation expectations. The fault lies with poorly managed
floating currencies, not with attempts by currencies users to protect against
the damage done by floating currencies, for example by hedging their dollar-
denominated investment portfolios with long commodity positions. Trying to
stop "speculation" will be like curing a fever by attacking the immune system.
You may get rid of the fever, but you won't get rid of the flu, and the
patient, no longer protected, may end up six feet under.  
  
The evidence for all this, such as the great rise in the use of commodity
derivatives and commodity index ETFs (exchange-traded funds) and ETNs
(exchange-traded notes) by long-term investors such as pension funds,
endowments, and sovereign wealth funds, in parallel the great recent rises in
commodity prices, are lumped by critics under their derogatory label of
"speculation." Another, and probably even larger, source of the oil run-up are
decisions by producers to keep oil in the ground (where its storage costs are
cheapest) rather than pump it only to sell it for depreciating dollars.
Similarly, there has been a great deal of informal "hoarding" of food. Here
the commodity is being stored by those who expect to consume, or who expect
their customers to consume, the commodity in the future. The stockpile is a
hedge against both the falling currencies and political risk that governments
might hoard and ration the food. This “tacit speculation” too reflects an
increase in inflation expectations. If or when inflation expectations
decrease, we can expect (contrary to “peak oil” theory) oil pumping to greatly
increase, as having dollars will once again become more valuable than having
oil in the ground, and we can expect informal food stockpiles to be drawn down
and food prices to drop.  
  
These are all attempts to preserve wealth in the face of a highly uncertain,
and probably falling, value of the future dollar and other floating
currencies. In the era of floating currencies, not only are commodities a
legitimate asset class, they are an essential asset class. Floating currencies
add a very large and dominating amount of noise to commodity price signals
when inflation expectations change, but there is no easy fix for this problem.  
  
Attacks against commodity "speculation" are attacks against efforts to protect
property and markets against highly uncertain currencies. Without this
protection, economies will be in grave danger of wealth destruction. Instead
of attacking "speculation", the great increase in trade of "paper barrels" or
"video barrels" should be encouraged. The more commodities can be traded as
bits instead of by shipping physical commodities, the lower the transaction
costs that will be imposed on tradition physical delivery markets. The
"rolling-over" of commodities futures -- when expiring futures are swapped for
distant futures instead of taking delivery of the physical commodity -- should
be formalized in long-term commodities securities that minimally disrupt
traditional "commercial" commodity hedging operations.  
  
We may be seeing only the first stages of a switch from floating currencies,
which may be proving to be unworkable, to commodity-backed currencies.
Floating currencies were and are a great historical experiment, and there is
no guarantee that such experiments will work out in the long run. By serving
monetary functions such as stores of value and hedges against currency-
denominated debt, commodity index ETFs and ETNs are starting to serve as
monetary substitutes. But the benefits so far have been limited to investors
and other big players. Those saving for retirement or who will have to pay for
their child's education are benefitting from the use of commodity long
positions to stablize pension and endowment funds against falling currencies
and protect them against future inflation. But we still have to take our wages
in floating currencies, hold our checking and savings accounts in floating
currencies, and pay or be paid our debts in floating currencies. Can commodity
money move from Wall Street to Main Street?  
  
There are, alas, great legal barriers to retail commodity money. While legal
barriers often just increase costs by a few basis points for Wall Street, they
usually prove insuperable for the man in the street. To remove these legal
barriers, contracts in any part of the economy should be allowed to use
commodity index ETFs or other standards of choice as payment terms. Negotiable
instruments law in the U.S. must be changed to allow payments by check, money
order, etc. in commodity standards to compete against government currencies on
a level playing field. Legal tender laws requiring an option to pay debts in
particular currencies should be eliminated in order to allow payment terms
denominated in commodity indices to be as simple as payment terms denominated
in dollars. These kinds of reforms will bring the benefits of stable commodity
money from Wall Street to the man in the street.  
  
If the Federal Reserve decided to use leading indicators (e.g. commodities)
instead of trailing indicators (e.g. the Consumer Price Index, CPI) to fight
inflation, or decided to go to a _de facto_ commodity index or back to the
gold standard, and stopped bad practices such as "printing" dollars to swap
for dubious real estate securities, we would not need to otherwise use
commodities for monetary purposes. If the Federal Reserve or the European
Central Bank prove incable of providing a stable currency, commodity money
will provide the long-term stability that our floating currencies since 1970
have usually not exhibited. The more governments try to fight the use of
commodities for monetary purposes, the more painful the effects of poorly
managed floating currencies will be, and the more painful the resulting
transition from those floating currencies to commodity money will be.

