More great comments from Devin, with the great bulk of which I agree, but of
course it's more fun to explore differences:  
  
 _In general, dividend growth of a broad index should be very roughly equal to
monetary inflation_  
  
Well, _total cash flow_ (including buybacks, sales of new issues, cash
takeovers and insider trading as well as dividends) would keep up with
inflation _if_ inflation had no negative impact on business. But I suspect
there may be quite a bit of negative impact from changes in inflation
expectations which revalue long-term contract terms and make planning more
difficult (e.g. introducing much greater uncertainty into both the customer
and producer sides of the commodities business).  
  
Also, it's very odd that a collectible premium would go down when inflation
rises (1970s) and go up when inflation goes down (1980s and 1990s). Assets
have a collectible premium because they hedge against inflation, so that the
collectible premium goes up when inflation expectations go up, and indeed
that's what we tend to see with other assets. The great variability of
earnings return on the S&P 500 is baffling, but I don't think it can be
explained by the collectible premium.  
  
I did not know that M2 growth in the 1970s was so amazingly small, given that
both CPI and PPI inflation was much higher than that, and the rise most
commodity prices was much greater still. I'm not sure static M2 numbers are
the definitive figure -- isn't velocity also important?  
  
Implied inflation expectations may be computed from the price of gold, which
is the closest to a pure collectible we have. But if you are right that the
collectible premium should be much higher for gold than for most commodities,
housing, and stocks (I don't agree, more below), gold won't give us the proper
collectible premium for other assets.  
  
 _you cannot simply add the buybacks to the dividends to get total discounted
cashflow. Imagine you are an endowment holding the stock forever._  
  
Nobody owns a stock forever, and whenever it is sold it's a huge cash flow for
the seller of that stock. 12 years is considered to be a very long average
holding time for a mutual fund. In any case, if we are looking a stock market
index as a whole, buybacks, cash takeovers, new issues, and insider trading
all constitute cash flows that must be counted to have an accurate view of the
cash flow of stocks.  
  
The next best thing would be to look at earnings history, as you've done in
the comparison above.

