In the middle of the Darby century came the important decision of _Miller v.
Race_. Surprisingly, no copy of this case is to be found online save in the
syllabus of Professor Gregory Maggs. So with his permission I've appended his
edited version of the case (with some additional very minor edits of my own)
below.  
  
Negotiable instruments – checks, bank notes, and so on – are promises to pay
or orders with an implied promise to pay, and are thus contracts. But they
differ from contracts in two important ways. First is the idea of “merger.”
Normally, a contract right is an abstraction that is located nowhere in
particular but belongs to a party to the contract or to a person to whom that
party has assigned that right. Possessing a copy of a normal contract has
nothing to do with who has rights under that contract. But in a negotiable
instrument, the contract right is “merged” into the document. Assignment of
that right takes place simply by transferring the document (in the case of a
bearer instrument) or by indorsing (signing) and transferring it.  
  
The second big way negotiable instruments differ from contracts is the “good
faith purchaser” or “holder in due course” rule which is illustrated by
_Miller v. Race_. In a normal sale of goods under common law, the new owner’s
title to the goods is at risk to the contractual defenses of a prior owner.
For example: Alice is Dr. Barb’s patient and is feeling ill. Barb says to
Alice, “sell me your Mercedes for $100 and you’ll feel a lot better.” Alice
complies, but then later realizes she was snookered. Meanwhile, Barb sells the
car to Chuck, who knows nothing of how Barb acquired it, for $50,000. Under
contract law, Chuck can get no greater title to the car than Barb had. But the
contract is void for undue influence, so Barb doesn’t have legal title to the
car. Ergo, Chuck does not, either. Alice can sue Chuck to get her car back.
Chuck must then sue Barb for his $50,000, an expensive and often-futile thing
to do.  
  
Contract defenses are invoked so commonly that any downstream owner of a good
is at significant title risk under common law. This risk could make things
very bad for paper money, which to work efficiently should change hands dozens
of times or more. Thus, _Miller v. Race_ has long been celebrated as an
advance that made bank notes under the common law a more efficient form of
money. _Miller_ helped create for promissory notes under common law
(including, crucially, bank notes) what is now known as the “good faith
purchaser” or “holder in due course” rule. Summarized, this rule says that a
holder in due course who obtained the instrument for value, in good faith, and
without notice of any upstream claims or defenses, is entitled to enforce the
promise to pay in that instrument regardless of most kinds of such claims or
defenses.  
  
The good faith purchaser rule can cause its own problems. For example, when
you sign a promissory note to get a mortgage, these days the bank usually
sells that note to an aggregator, who bundle up these mortgage notes in
packages and sell them to investors. In most states if you make your mortgage
payments to Bank A, who has meanwhile sold the mortgage to Bank B (and perhaps
not told you), Bank B can bill you for that same payment and foreclose on your
house if you don't pay. You have to pay Bank B and then beg, plead, or sue
Bank A to get your money back.  
  
Today, the differences between negotiable instrument law and contract law are
sufficient that negotiable instruments and sale of goods are in different and
largely distinct sections of the U.S. Uniform Commercial Code.  
  
Mr. Race was a clerk at the Bank of England who refused to pay on demand when
Miller presented the Bank’s note. Miller was an innkeeper who had unknowingly
taken the note as payment from a lodger who had stolen the note from the
mails. Forthwith, _Miller v. Race_ :  
  
 ** _Miller v. Race_**  
Court of King’s Bench  
1 Burr. 452, 97 Eng. Rep. 398 (K.B. 1758)  
  

> It was an action of trover against the defendant, upon a bank note, for the
payment of twenty-one pounds ten shillings to one William Finney or bearer, on
demand.  
>  
> The cause came on to be tried before Lord Mansfield at the sittings in
Trinity term last at Guildhall, London and upon the trial it appeared that
William Finney, being possessed of this bank note on the 11th of December
1756, sent it by the general post, under cover, directed to one Bernard
Odenharty, at Chipping Norton in Oxfordshire; that on the same night the mail
was robbed, and the bank note in question (amongst other notes) taken and
carried away by the robber; that this bank note, on the 12th of the same
December, came into the hands and possession of the plaintiff, for a full and
valuable consideration, and in the usual course and way of his business, and
without any notice or knowledge of this bank note being taken out of the mail.  
>  
> It was admitted and agreed, that, in the common and known course of trade,
bank notes are paid by and received of the holder or possessor of them, as
cash; and that in the usual way of negotiating bank notes, they pass from one
person to another as cash, by delivery only and without any further inquiry or
evidence of title, than what arises from the possession. It appeared that Mr.
Finney, having notice of this robbery, on the 13th December, applied to the
Bank of England, “to stop the payment of this note:” which was ordered
accordingly, upon Mr. Finney’s entering into proper security “to indemnify the
bank.”  
>  
> Some little time after this, the plaintiff applied to the bank for the
payment of this note; and for that purpose delivered the note to the
defendant, who is a clerk in the bank: but the defendant refused either to pay
the note, or to re-deliver it to the plaintiff. Upon which this action was
brought against the defendant.  
>  
> The jury found a verdict for the plaintiff, and the sum of 21l. 10s.
damages, subject nevertheless to the opinion of this Court upon this
question—“Whether under the circumstances of this case, the plaintiff had a
sufficient property in this bank note, to entitle him to recover in the
present action?”  
> * * *  
>  
> Sir Richard Lloyd, for the defendant.  
> The present action is brought, not for the money due upon the note; but for
the note itself, the paper, the evidence of the debt. So that the right to the
money is not the present question: the note is only an evidence of the money’s
being due to him as bearer.  
>  
> The note must either come to the plaintiff by assignment; or must be
considered as if the bank gave a fresh, separate, and distinct note to each
bearer. Now the plaintiff can have no right by the assignment of a robber. And
the bank cannot be considered as giving a new note to each bearer: though each
bearer may be considered as having obtained from the bank a new promise.  
>  
> I do not say whether the bank can, or cannot stop payment; that is another
question. But the note is only an instrument of recovery. Now this note, or
these goods (as I may call it,) was the property of Mr. Finney, who paid in
the money: he is the real owner. It is like a medal which might entitle a man
to payment of money, or to any other advantage. And it is by Mr. Finney’s
authority and request that Mr. Race detained it.  
>  
> It may be objected, that this note is to be considered as cash “in the usual
course of trade.” But still, the course of trade is not at all affected by the
present question, about the right to the note. A different species of action
must be brought for the note, from what must be brought against the bank for
the money. And this man has elected to bring trover for the note itself, as
owner of the note; and not to bring his action against the bank for the money.
In which action of trover, property can not be proved in the plaintiff: for a
special proprietor can have no right against the true owner.  
> * * *  
>  
> Mr. Williams contra for the plaintiff.  
> The holder of this bank note, upon a valuable consideration has a right to
it, even against the true owner.  
>  
> 1st, the circulation of these notes vests a property in the holder, who
comes to the possession of it, upon a valuable consideration.  
>  
> 2dly, this is of vast consequence to trade and commerce; and they would be
greatly incommoded if it were otherwise.  
>  
> 3dly, this falls within the reason of a sale in market-overt; and ought to
be determined upon the same principle.  
> * * *  
>  
> Lord Mansfield now delivered the resolution of the Court.  
>  
> After stating the case at large, he declared that at the trial, he had no
sort of doubt, but this action was well brought, and would lie against the
defendant in the present case; upon the general course of business, and from
the consequences to trade and commerce: which would be much incommoded by a
contrary determination.  
>  
> It has been very ingeniously argued by Sir Richard Lloyd for the defendant.
But the whole fallacy of the argument turns upon comparing bank notes to what
they do not resemble, and what they ought not to be compared to, viz. to
goods, or to securities, or documents for debts.  
>  
> Now they are not goods, not securities, nor documents for debts, nor are so
esteemed: but are treated as money, as cash, in the ordinary course and
transaction of business, by the general consent of mankind; which gives them
the credit and currency of money, to all intents and purposes. They are as
much money, as guineas themselves are; or any other current coin, that is used
in common payments, as money or cash.  
> * * *  
>  
> Here, an inn-keeper took it, bonâ fide, in his business from a person who
made an appearance of a gentleman. Here is no pretence or suspicion of
collusion with the robber: for this matter was strictly inquired and examined
into at the trial; and is so stated in the case, “that he took it for a full
and valuable consideration, in the usual course of business.” Indeed if there
had been any collusion, or any circumstances of unfair dealing; the case had
been much otherwise. If it had been a note for 1000l. it might have been
suspicious: but this was a small note for 21l. 10s. only: and money given in
exchange for it.  
> * * *  
>  
> A bank-note is constantly and universally, both at home and abroad, treated
as money, as cash; and paid and received, as cash; and it is necessary, for
the purposes of commerce, that their currency should be established and
secured.  
> * * *  
>  
> Lord Mansfield declared that the Court were all of the same opinion, for the
plaintiff; and that Mr. Just. Wilmot concurred.

