Your FinbarrNotes (just gold) vs. SzaboNotes (basket) analysis is very
interesting. You have to create a "bubble that never pops". Even after you've
driven me out of business, if the gold bubble ever pops, or even when it just
loses that initial gold-beats-the-basket prestige whereby it initially gained
the monopoly, you've created new opportunities for entry into the market.
Especially if consumer's mental transaction costs are zero so that consumers
don't at all mind switching from one currency to another. Also, under the zero
transaction cost assumption the fact that contracts are denominated in your
currency doesn't give you any lock-in advantage, as it's costless to exchange
currencies and to translate book entries from one currency to another for
accounting purposes. (Indeed, under zero transaction costs why denominate
contracts in a currency at all? Just denominate them in terms of the ETF
basket or weight of gold itself, and when the time comes pay by purchasing and
transferring the ETFs, and cut out the middleman. Indeed, in a perfectly zero
transaction cost world barter is costless and there is no need for a
currency).  
  
Since zero transaction costs across the board bring zany results, I don't
think there's any way to get away from looking at specific kinds of
transaction costs, such as  
  
(1) the risks and benefits of fractional reserve banking and maturity/duration
transformation -- the lower the reserves and the greater the duration mismatch
the lower of a collectible premium it generates on the basket investments of
the reserves, but the greater the risk of bank failure. ("Duration" BTW is
more general term than "maturity" and includes things like a weighted average
of maturities, e.g. of a bond with coupons).  
  
(2) the speed and costs of switching from holding currency to investment and
vice versa, and of exchanging currencies (under zero transaction costs here
one holds a currency only for an infinitesimal period of time, just long
enough to liquidate an investment, then make a payment with the proceeds, then
for the payee to invest the proceeds -- it all happens in an instant and
costlessly).  
  
(3) the mental transaction and accounting costs of using multiple currencies.  
  
n.b. without transaction costs of the (2) or (3) kind there is no lock-in
effect from having prices quoted in or long-term contracts denominated in a
particular currency, and thus there are no barriers to entering the currency-
issuing market with a new standard.  
  
(4) taxation costs and other political costs and risks.  
  
I'm using the broad economists' definition of "transaction costs" (which
admittedly can be misleading because it includes costs that aren't terribly
analogous to broker's fees, but rather have to do with risks, the cost of
information, etc.) and thus under the no transaction costs assumption all
these costs (1)-(4) would be zero. There would be no lock-in, no barrier to
entry in the currency market. I suspect you are not looking at many of these
costs as zero in your assumption of zero transaction costs. Probably we should
enumerate what we believe the substantial costs of any sort are, whether we
call them transaction costs or not, in order to clarify our discussion, since
obviously a zero-transaction cost world in the sense I am using the term is
too imaginary for useful analysis. But it also may be the case that technology
could lower some transaction costs so substantially that the traditional
assumptions about the currency issuing business could no longer apply --
another reason to analyze each kind of cost explicitly, even if it forces us
into less formal territory.

