Unable to otherwise explain today's high commodity prices, Frank Veneroso and
others fear we are in a commodity bubble. Exhibit A is the recent vast
increase in the use of commodity derivatives[*]:  
  
  
  
Here's how Veneroso observes the unprecedented state of our commodity markets:  

> Though the six-fold increase in such positions over a few brief years is
dramatic , it is the magnitude of these positions that is most alarming...It
is hard to know what to make of this data. But it is noteworthy that several
years ago, at the then prevailing lower commodity prices, the entire above
ground stock of all commodity inventories was only in the hundreds of billions
of dollars. Even if only a fraction of the increase in global commodity
derivative aggregates in recent years corresponds to a net long position of
investors or speculators, implying speculative and investment positions of a
“few trillions of dollars,” it would appear that this increased demand for
commodity derivative positions has overwhelmed what have been relatively small
markets...  
>  
> No wonder, then, that this cycle’s bull market in commodity prices has gone
higher in inflation-adjusted terms [i.e. in terms of the CPI and PPI -- a poor
near-term measure of inflation, see below] and for longer than in all prior
uninterrupted half-decade cycles in the past.

I agree with Veneroso that the recent commodities boom has a strong causal
link to the recent rise in the amount and variety of commodity derivatives.
But I couldn't disagree with him more about the role of inflation. Prices, and
especially wages, react very slowly to changes in money supply, so that the
CPI and PPI are _trailing_ indicators. The leading indicators are increases in
money supply in excess to increased demand for money and the associated (if
disproportionate) increases in commodity prices.  
  
_M3, an estimate of the supply of dollars (including a reconstructed estimate
for recent years). M3 is increasing at the highest rate since the 1970s, as
are to a lesser extent the supplies of euros and other major currencies,
resulting in a commodity boom not seen since the 1970s.
Source:nowandfutures.com_  
  
The recent vast increase in commodity derivatives, and the resulting commodity
boom, is a largely rational response to the vast increase in the supply,
relative to demand, for the dollar and to a lesser extent the euro and most
other major currencies during most of the last decade. This despite the fact
that commodities prices have in the last year risen (at about 40%/year) much
faster than the growth of money supply (about 15%/yr). To see why, observe
that one of the most useful but least talked about uses of derivatives is
their ability to simulate the economic behavior (primarily risk and return) of
one kind of asset based on contracts for another kind of asset or performed in
another legal environment. The classic example is Eurodollars. But let's take
a general scenario:  
  
Alice wants to promise Bob to transfer asset X. But the risks associated with
Bob holding asset X on his balance sheet, or Alice holding liability X on her
balance sheet, until actual transfer of the asset, are too high, or the
transaction costs of actually transfering X from Alice to Bob are too high, or
both.  
  
(1) Solution for risks of holding asset X on books: derivatives. Alice has
both assets and liabilities on her books. These have individual and net risks
just like an investment portfolio. If Alice has the same amount of assets and
liabilities all denominated in the same currency, her portfolio is balanced.
But if, for example, she imports from Europe (thus creating liabilities in
euros) and sells in the U.S. (creating assets in dollars), her portfolio
becomes strongly subject to risk of dollar devaluation against the euro. If a
new asset or liability creates such unbalanced risk, it can be hedged with
derivatives.  
  
(2) Solution for transaction cost of transferring asset X from Alice to Bob:
use derivatives to create a synthetic asset. Construct from derivatives and
asset Y a synthetic asset that economically behaves like asset X. These
separate derivatives and asset Y that form the synthetic all can be transfered
with low transaction costs, thus forming an asset economically equivalent to
asset X but that, unlike X, can be transferred from Alice to Bob at low cost.  
  
The reason these uses of derivatives are seldom talked about is that the main
cause of problem (1) is the instability of government currencies that it is
legally necessary (for a variety of reasons) for contracts to be denominated
in. The cause of problem (2) is usually a legal barrier to a particular
transaction -- a tax, exchange control, risk caused by regulation, or risk of
confiscation in Bob's jurisdiction are four examples. People who route around
the law tend to do so quietly, explaining their acts by euphemism, even if as
here the new route is perfectly legal and is made necessary by deep flaws in
the law or the way the law is executed.  
  
There are often, in other words, huge discrepencies between the contract terms
required or incentivized by law and the most economically efficient contract
terms. Partly this is due to political stupidity, and partly to the inevitable
profound imperfection of any body of rules.  
  
(3) A third function of derivatives is simply as a store of value: a way to
diversify or hedge inflation risk in an investment portfolio that otherwise
contains either (a) debt denominated in a potentially inflating currency, (b)
equity in companies with assets consisting mainly of debts denominated in a
potentially inflating currency, or (c) both.  
  
In performing functions (1) and (2), derivatives usually substitute for or
augment currencies as a medium of exchange. For (3) they substitute for or
augment the monetary function of a store of value. Most derivatives, in other
words, perform largely _monetary_ functions. They augment or substitute for a
flawed method of payment or a flawed store of value.  
  
 _Gold prices in dollars (and, not pictured here, the dollar prices of many
other commonly traded commodities) roughly follow changes in the global
monetary base of dollars. Source:nowandfutures.com_  
  
In a climate where one or more commonly used currencies are inflating (and by
"inflation" I simply mean rise in money supply without concurrent rise in
demand for that currency, not the CPI or any particular and usually trailing
measure of inflation), derivatives, if they can be analyzed and traded at low
cost, are very much in demand. Furthermore, if all of the currencies
practically available for contractual payment terms are inflating, these
derivatives will come to be increasingly based, not on currency-denominated
debt, but on commodities, especially commodities for which supply and demand
are relatively inelastic in the short and medium terms.  
  
Why is it rational, rather than reflecting a bubble, for the recent rise in
commodity prices to outpace the recent rise in money supply? The rise in
commodity prices reflects the increase not just in supply of dollars per unit
of commodity, but greatly increased demand for a commodity _as money_ , i.e.
for the monetary functions it serves either directly or indirectly via
derivatives, on top of the relatively steady demand for consumption. As I have
argued elsewhere, this increase is broad-based: all commodities that can be
traded with low transaction costs on modern markets, and that exhibit short-
and medium-term inelasticity of supply and consumption demand, are useful for
and are being used as reserves for the new derivative currencies. Where
computerized analysis lowers mental transaction costs, as with modern
derivatives, it pays to diversify one's books, portfolios, and hedges among
multiple currencies.  
  
Of course, the traditional use of commodities futures and derivatives by
commodity producers and consumers to hedge the assets and liabilities of the
commodity sales and purchases inherent in their business continues. But these
don't account for the vast majority of commodity derivatives use in recent
years.  
  
Before modern computers, networks, and software engineering, the cost of such
derivatives was usually prohibitive. In the last period of monetary inflation
and the resulting commodity boom, the 1970s, derivatives were available to few
and only the very simplest hedges or synthetic assets could be understood, and
even then very imperfectly. Today derivatives, and their use in very complex
hedges and synthetic assets, are much better understood by most of their
users, thanks to computerized game tree analysis, and are available to many.
They can be designed, simulated, and traded electronically with very low
transaction costs. Computerized derivatives are smart contracts that lower
mental transaction costs. So much so, that they've created a vast new world of
contractual relationships completely impossible with the brain alone.  
  
Speaking perhaps a bit metaphorically, we are witnessing the rise of new and
privately issued fractional reserve currencies. They need not and effectively
cannot legally be called "money" by their "issuers", nor can they effectively
be used directly in most contracts for payments. But they can be used
indirectly to hedge payment terms or investments denominated in flawed, that
is in inflating or otherwise unstable, government currencies in which normal
contracts and instruments are generally denominated. The results are synthetic
"currencies" that, in their economic behavior, may be almost indistinguishable
from a tradtional commodity-backed and privately issued fractional reserve
currency.  
  
No wonder the Federal Reserve and other central banks are moving hard to usurp
jurisdiction over derivatives (per, for example, the recently announced
Paulsen plan here in the U.S. to consolidate a variety of financial regulation
under the Federal Reserve). To effectively regulate derivatives, for better or
worse, the Fed will have to understand them first. But they do not have this
knowledge. Indeed no human brain holds this knowledge. The knowledge needed to
understand the dizzying variety of derivatives exists mainly in the form of
computer simulations.  
  
Derivatives, the money of the digital era, perform monetary functions in
competition with the Federal Reserve's dollars, an increasingly primitive
holdover of the paper era. By regulating derivatives the Federal Reserve
regulates its competition. This creates a profound conflict of interest. It's
like putting Rust Belt executives in charge of Silicon Valley. Such regulation
may cause, not the popping of a commodity bubble, but the destruction of a
nascent economic order made necessary by the prediliction of the Federal
Reserve and other central banks to inflate their fiat currencies. Whether
ignorance or conflict of interest will play the greater role in the
destruction of the new currencies, or whether one will cancel the other out
leaving the derivatives markets in relative freedom, remains to be seen.  
  
[Obligatory Wikipedia links: Eurodollars, elasticity]  
  
[H/T: I learned of Venero's paper from Byrne Hobart]  
  
[Here's a prior explanation of mine giving a broader overview of why commodity
prices reflect demand for their monetary functions as well as for their
consumption, but not explaining the role of derivatives].  
  
[*] These numbers are a bit stale -- it would be great to see to what extent
this growth has continued. If any reader has data on commodity derivative use
through 2007, please let me know.  
  
[UPDATE: here is more straightforward article that gets the basic facts right:
production up, inventories up, consumption down, prices up -- inexplicable if
consumption is the only major source of demand -- but gets the explanation
wrong, replacing the rational and efficient use of commodity derivatives as
money that I have described here with the typical speculations about
"speculation" resulting in a "bubble"].  
  
[Ad: I am now providing consulting services.]

