Clay Shirky describes how micropayments proponent Scott McCloud seems to have
thrown in the towel, and he points to my old micropayments paper. A few
comments on Shirky's excellent description of the micropayments problem and on
my old paper may be in order.  
  
When I wrote that paper I thought of micropayments as payments of a
granularity smaller than the 1 cent granularity of traditional prices, or very
close to it. My prediction was that the granularity of payments on the
Internet would be somewhat higher than traditional price granularity. This was
in a response to the fascinating Digital Silk Road/Agorics idea that you could
buy and sell IP packet transmission, memory space, and the like at
unprecedentedly low granularities like a thousandth of a cent. There is
basically no important computational transaction cost barrier to such
payments, but I described mental transaction cost barriers that still have not
been surmounted. The efforts of micropayment engineers focusing on
computational rather than mental transaction costs were and are misguided.  
  
So when the Post Office raises postage rates by 1 cent, or charges a few cents
more for one class of mail than another, that's very close to what I thought
of as a micropayment and is what I was predicting would be very hard (not
impossible) to do productively on the Internet. But when iTunes sells a song
for a dollar, regardless of how popular the song is, that's a price
granularity that is sufficiently high to overcome mental transaction costs.
Nowadays many people call even a dollar a "micropayment" because it's smaller
than your typical credit card payment, and this muddles the issue. Paypal and
some services like iTunes have shown that there's at least a significant niche
market below typical minimum credit card payment, but it hasn't shown that
micropayments of the kind I talked about are feasible.  
  
I don't claim that price granularities of near 1 cent or below will never make
economic sense on the Internet, but they do require a sophisticated attention
to preference revelation and mental transaction costs that so far has
generally been lacking. Something like micropayments, or at least low-
granularity accounting, is happening on the advertising payment end rather
than the consumer payment end. The business of selling eyeballs wholesale is
much better able to automate the sophisticated accounting and auditing that is
required for such schemes to work. Some proxy measures for eyeballs, e.g.
based on "hits", have proven to be feasible when computers rather than humans
can reliably do the counting at any granularity below thousands. Arguably some
online games have also achieved low price granularities, although here
payments are part of the entertainment value of the game (as in traditional
games like Monopoly(tm)) rather than just a necessary transaction cost.  
  
The extent to which iTunes and the like can compete with free content is
another issue which Shirky describes well. This competition interacts with
price granularity insofar as the mental transaction costs put a floor on
content prices and competition from free content (artists seeking fame rather
than money) puts a ceiling on content prices. Shirky plausibly argues that
there is little or (ultimately) no room in between this floor and ceiling
leaving little and perhaps ultimately no significant market for online content
funded directly by the consumer.  
  
Here are a couple more aspects of micropayments and price granularity I have
long believed but I'm not sure I've sufficiently made clear:  
  
(1) As more low-wealth people get on the Internet, price granularity will
naturally fall as such consumers are generally willing to put more effort and
attention into shopping per money saved. Much of the reason price granularity
has been higher on the Internet is because its users have higher than average
wealth. However, unlike point (2) below this effect is not very large and
won't by itself get us below traditional price granularities.  
  
(2) Where the mental transaction/preference revelation problem can be solved
for high-wealth consumers at 1 cent granularity for a particular kind of
Internet transaction, there is nothing magical about 1 cent, and it might well
be easy to further reduce price granularity to a thousandth or a millionth of
a cent. In that sense I'm a big fan of the agorics approach -- since
"micropayments" has been taken to include much larger payments perhaps we
could call them "nanopayments" -- and I hope I haven't overly discouraged
people from looking at these fascinating and potentially quite lucrative and
revolutionary possibilities.

