Often in political parlance the phrase "the market" is used quite broadly to
cover a wide variety of voluntary economic institutions, including firms, non-
profit organizations, families, and so on in addition to markets proper. But
traditional neoclassical economics is about ideal markets proper:
instantaneous buying and selling on a costless spot exchange. Ronald Coase
started expanding the scope of economics with his work on the firm, and this
line of thinking has developed into a school, often called the "new
institutional economics" or NIE that focuses on non-market or partial-market
voluntary economic institutions as well as on the conditions that must be
satisfied for efficient markets to be possible. The economics Nobel committee
has finally recognized the study of non-market but voluntary economic
institutions with its awards this year to Oliver Williamson and Elinor Ostrom.  
  
Williamson and his fellow travelers Oliver Hart, Yoram Barzel, Steven Cheung,
and Janet Landa have long influenced my thinking about measuring value, mental
transaction costs, smart contracts,  
the origins of money, and more.  
  
The new institutional economics school in a nutshell holds that often
transaction costs are too high for spot markets to work properly. If spot
markets were perfectly efficient we would not need firms or long-term
contracts, for example, but in fact we have those and many other institutions
besides pure markets. The NIE studies and has started to explain the functions
of institutions that are not markets proper, such as long-term contracts and
firms, as well as the legal underpinnings of market economies, especially
property and contracts. Contracts and property are the main formal expressions
of economic relations recognized by the NIE, which makes this school
especially interesting to someone like me interested in the economic role of
contracts and property and how to adapt these institutions to (and even to
some extent incorporate them into) evolving technology.  
  
Note that these institutions are "voluntary" in the sense of the traditional
common-law principle of non-initiation of force, and assume a sophisticated
legal framework. When this assumption doesn't hold, these principles usually
work in a very different way or don't work at all, and one has to be very
careful applying them. (See here and here for more on the problem of coercive
externalities).  
  
Meanwhile, here is a good article introducing the other economics Nobel winner
this year, Elinor Ostrom.

