 _I believe the stocks to flow ratio is the lowest for gold of all commodities
(except perhaps oil, if you count oil in the ground as stocks)._  
  
To some extent we should count below-ground stocks of other minerals too. It
depends on the ratio of below-ground to above-ground storage costs and on
extraction costs. With stable property rights (broadly speaking, including
stable politics where ownership is nationalized), below-ground storage costs
can be quite low for a wide variety of minerals.  
  
 _let's estimate that the current aggregate demand for collectibles is spread
25%, 25%, 25%, 25% among dollars, housing, stocks and gold. Moldbug's point is
that if the government ran a sound monetary policy, the collectible premium
would end up being something more like 90% 3% 3% 3%._  
  
If we knew for certain that the expected future inflation of the dollar was
zero forever, the collectible premium on everything except the dollar,
including gold and silver, would fall to zero. Since gold's price is almost
all collectible premium, its price would fall to probably less than ten
dollars an ounce. As inflation expectations fall towards zero the price of
gold thus falls more, not less, than other commodities.  
  
Since we can expect future dollar inflation to be nowhere near zero, it pays
to diversify one's investment amongst a diverse portfolio of inflation hedges
-- precious metals, commodities, housing, etc. -- diversifying away a wide
variety of non-inflation risks while protecting against inflation. If
particular collectibles go in and out of fashion, it pays to arbitrage the
eventual convergence by heavier weighting in the currently less popular
collectibles. If people behaved rationally, there would not be any change from
the 25%/25%/etc. starting point -- every asset that fully hedged against
inflation would maintain the same collectible premium. (An asset that was a
less good hedge against inflation, as I believe is the case with stocks, would
of course rationally carry a lower collectible premium, as would an asset with
less favorable tax treatment, so there would be divergence for these reasons).  
  
Note that the main collectible function people are seeking here is store of
value. If people were seeking an alternative medium of exchange, gold's lower
storage and transport costs could make more of a difference and Moldbug's
argument would have more weight. But with ETFs that can be readily converted
into dollars, the historical advantages of gold's low storage and transport
costs disappear: commodity ETFs and their derivatives (e.g. bank notes that
could be exchanged for them), if it were legally encouraged instead of
discouraged, would make a great medium of exchange, but being able to readily
convert back and forth between ETFs and dollars is good enough for store-of-
value purposes.  
  
I quite agree with your comments that different tax treatments are important
in helping set different collectible premiums, albeit I wonder if one could
extract this as a separate demand component, a tax treatment component.

