Historical novelist Robert Harris writes a good article on the parallels
between Pompey's war on piracy, accompanied by the _Lex Gabina_ , and the
modern war on terror and accompanying expansion of unchecked executive power.
The ancient Greek historian Plutarch wrote that the _Lex Gabina_ , a response
to piratical terrorism at Rome's main port, Ostia, ceded "what amounted in
fact to an absolute authority and uncontrolled power over everyone." Literally
Pompey was granted an authority to wage war that extended fifty miles inland
from any coast, which included Rome and most other major cities and towns of
the Republic. Perhaps not far from the arbitrary detentions now allowed under
the new Military Commissions Act. The MCA grants the U.S. military the
authority to detain either U.S. citizens or foreigners anywhere in the world
and try them before military commissions with a bare minimum of due process.
If you are not a U.S. citizen, there is no appeal to normal U.S. courts as
_habeas corpus_ for you has been suspended, regardless of whether you reside
in the U.S.  
  
Pompey did far better than our modern terror warriors: he is reported to have
eliminated the pirate threat all across the Mediterranean within three months.
But this was not followed by a rescinding of his powers. Rather, military
jurisdiction over civilians came to be seen as normal, and political
opposition to these powers came to be seen as a form of aid and comfort to
rebels or pirates, and thus legally categorized alongside rebellion and
piracy. Julius Caesar, followed by Augustus Caesar, would soon usurp Pompey's
power, ending the Republic and creating the totalitarian Empire. (Yes, the
political plot of "Star Wars" was loosely based on these all too real events).  
  
Another parallel closer to our time was the Reichstag Fire, a terrorist attack
which was followed by the Enabling Act. This statute, however, was a far more
overt assumptions of arbitrary executive power and abrogation of the
constitution than the Military Commissions Act.  
  
The conversion of democratic fear into totalitarian power is a very ancient
and devasting pattern.

