This is the first of a series of comments on the United States Constitution,
with some riffs thrown in about U.S. history generally.  
  
We start on the eve of the American Revolution. England had colonized a wide
variety of places on the globe under three general models: proprietary,
corporate, and royal. All three occured on the East Coast of North America in
the original thirteen colonies that became the United States.  
  
Royal colonies were technically part of the royal administrative hierarchy,
but they were the least common type. The most common type was the corporate.
Corporations ranged from Church organizations (like abbeys) to municipalities
("boroughs") to, most important for our purposes, the colonial corporations.
The East India Company, one of the first joint stock companies, is the most
famous and powerful example of a colonial corporation, but most other English
colonies and a number of the American colonies were also granted in this form.
Proprietary colonies were modelled after Counties Palatine: counties that
were, except for a handful of narrow "extraordinary writs", immune from the
jurisdiction of King and Parliament.  
  
Unlike modern economic corporations, both corporate and proprietary colonies
were granted political property rights. These are rights to exercise coercive
police powers: to collect taxes, to make and enforce certain kinds of laws.
Traditional political property rights, called franchises, were narrow grants
to exercise very particular kinds of police powers. The grants to colonial
corporations were often much broader and vaguer, granting rights of
"government" or "internal police" while reserving "the rights of Englishmen"
to colonists. Furthermore, the distance of their operation from the Crown and
Parliament, and absentee colonial governors often lent colonists a free hand
in governing, which they tended to do through legislatures elected by owners
of real property. Although under long English legal precedent corporate
charters, and especially charterted political powers, are to be interpreted
narrowly, the broad wording of many of the colonial charters made this hard to
do.  
  
Some colonies (such as Virginia and the Carolinas) lost their corporate or
proprietary status through _quo warranto_ forfeiture proceedings and became
royal colonies. Others through _quo warranto_ had their charters reissued in
new forms. In both cases, governors usually came to be appointed by the Crown
and local legislatures gained broad powers of lawmaking on the subject of the
"internal police." But, as long as the charters were considered political
property rights, no entity was sovereign -- neither the Crown, nor Parliament,
nor the legislatures could exercise political power at will, but had to
respect the political property rights; i.e. had to operate according to the
colonial charter.  
  
The Romanist worldview is an ancient and pernicious one, and its reassertion
in the 18th century in English politics led among many other things to the
American Revolution. The Romanist view dates back to the Roman Empire, and
came to the modern world via the Code of the Empereror Justinian. This Code
was revived in the West by the new law schools (later universities) of the
12th century and became the standard law taught at Continental medieval
universities. England's universities, by contrast, did not teach the standard
English law (common law) until the middle of the 18th century. Instead, the
standard English legal education occurred at the Inns of Court, and taught a
legal and political structure radically different to Justinian's, one
unintelligible to the typical university legal scholar or political
philosopher. Even though real law by that time differed widely from the
Justinian Code, the Code has exerted an influence that slowly caused, first
Continental, and then worldwide, political philosophy and then law to coverge
on its model. The Napoleonic Code and most other modern European codes are
modelled after Justinian's.  
  
From the Justinian Code we get two totalitarian superstitions: first, that
there must be a locus of power, a "sovereign", somewhere in any political
system. In Justinian's Empire, this locus was the emperor himself, whose word
was law. From this philosophy came the view of the sovereign king or dictator
espoused by Bodin and Hobbes. In this model the king is the "head" and the
rest of the "body politic" is controlled by the king, just as our brains
control our bodies. Under Rosseau and Bentham, this locus was switched to "the
people" or to, in practice, a parliament that supposedly represented "the
people." Under the extreme sovereigntist view, separation of powers,
federalism, and political property rights are all an illusion -- all power is
just a revocable delegation from a supreme locus of sovereignty.  
  
Actual English law and political structure were very different. Under this
law, royal power was actually divided among the King, the King's counselors,
Parliament, and justices. None of these entities was the "locus" of power but
all played crucial roles. Furthermore, much of this power had been granted to
other entities -- nobles, lords proprietor, municipal and colonial and church
corporations, guilds, and so on -- in the form of largely irrevocable
political property rights. Under the sovereigntist view, taught in
universities, all such property grants were merely revocable delegations. But
under the actual common law, taught to the actual lawyers and judges of the
time in the Inns of Court (institutions completely independent of
universities, and thus largely uninfected by Roman Law), these delegations
were property rights forfeitable back to the grantor -- and the original
grantor was the Crown -- only under extreme breach of grant conditions under a
_quo warranto_ proceeding.  
  
The substantive law of Justinian's Code is quite valuable, containing a purely
economic view of property championed by, among others, Adam Smith, and giving
rise to our efficient modern capitalist economies. But its procedural law is
utterly totalitarian and helped give rise, first to the totalitarian Kings and
Czars, then to Napoleon, and then to the communist and fascist dictators of
the 20th century. The English legal world largely avoided this fate, but the
freedoms of its peoples have been undermined by its own creeping Romanism in
the form of legislative sovereignty. The political philosophies and "political
science" of universities have always been dominated by the sovereigntist
paradigm, which pits sovereign government versus "anarchy" as our only
political alternatives. When the Inns of Court gave way to universities in
teaching English law, English legal philosophy and political structure too
became increasingly Romanist.  
  
Of the legal claims made by the American Revolutionists, the strongest and
most credible was their argument that the novel assertions of parliamentary
sovereignty under Lord North violated the colonial charters. But by that time
American colonists, too, were under the spell of Rosseau's doctrine of
legislative sovereignty. Samuel Adams reported on the eve of the Revolution,
trying to square the circle, that is to reconcile the supposed "supreme power"
(sovereignty) of Parliament with the political property rights granted by the
charters:  

> [Governor Hutchinson arguing on behalf of Parliament] although ... there
must be one supreme authority [Parliament] ... , this constitution
[Massachusett's colonial charter] will admit of subordinate powers, with
legislative and executive authority, greater or less, according to local and
other circumstances." "This is very true," the council [per Samuel Adams]
replied, "and implies that the legislative and executive authority granted to
the subordinate powers, should extend and operate, as far as the grant allows;
and that, if it does not exceed the limits prescribed to it, and no forfeiture
be incurred, the supreme power has no rightful authority to take away or
diminish it, or to substitute its own acts, in cases wherein the acts of the
subordinate power can, according to its constitution, operate. To suppose the
contrary, is to suppose, that it has no property in the privileges granted to
it; for, _if it holds them at the will of the supreme power, ... it can have
no property in them...._ But, as in fact, the two powers are not incompatible,
and do subsist together, each restraining its acts to their constitutional
objects, can we not from hence, see how the supreme power may supervise,
regulate, and make general laws for the kingdom, without interfering with the
privileges of the subordinate powers within it? [emphasis added]

  
Since the sovereignty of Parliament was unacceptable to the colonists ("no
taxation without representation"), and centuries of Romanist propaganda had by
then extinguished almost all knowledge and recognition of political property
rights beyond the Inns of Court, distribution of powers survived in the United
States in only two forms: federalism (the nesting of larger and smaller
territories, each with separate jurisdictions) and separation of powers (per
Montisque, the separation between executive, judicial, and legislative
powers). "Sovereignty" still had to be located somewhere. At first, during the
Articles of Confederation period, colonies were dubbed "States" and declared
by many to be sovereign. But even under the Articles of Confederation this was
a fiction -- the Congress, not the States, sent diplomats abroad, and the
"States" had delegated military authority to a confederate army led General
Washington. As we shall see, the United States Constitution would render any
talk of state sovereignty completely a matter of fiction, and it rivalled
another fiction that would dominate in the long run -- that it was not any
real entity, but a romantic fiction called "The People" that were sovereign.
Using this fiction, the nature of the United States Constitution as a
fictional grant of political property rights can be elucidated. Here is the
preface to the Constitution, not legally binding, but illuminating of its
nature:  

> We the People of the United States, in Order to form a more perfect Union,
establish Justice, insure domestic Tranquility, provide for the common
defence, promote the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to
ourselves and our Posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the
United States of America.

  
The Constitution proceeds to list a number of legally binding Articles, just
as in a corporate charter. "We the People" was in fact a small cabal of
delegates sent from state legislatures, who had only authority to amend the
Articles of Confederation, not to unilaterally rewrite the rules under which
said Articles could be amended such that they effectively scrapped them and
started over. But with concepts like "We the People" blazing across the mental
sky, who needs legal propriety?  
  
Nevertheless, this nice fiction allowed the United States to avoid creating a
real locus of sovereignty by creating a fictional sovereignty to satisfy the
Romanists. Sovereignty, under this doctrine, is vested in "We The People."
Some of this political power is granted, charter-like, to the United States
federal government. The rest is granted (per the 10th Amendment) "to the
States, or to the people, respectively" -- that is to each State and to
individuals. In reality, political power is distributed amongst the federal
government, states, counties, and munipalities, with a variety of enumerated
and unenumerated rights that these governments may not infringe being retained
by private persons. Meanwhile, though, political property rights, which had
been central to the colonial charters on which the United States Constitution
was modelled, had been forgotten here, and indeed in England outside of the
Inns of Court and the now-obscure passage on franchises in Blackstone's
_Commentaries_. The three main safeguards against totalitarianism in the
United States would be federalism, separation of powers, and the Bill of
Rights.

