Hal Finney describes the surprising results of the Hotelling model of
nonrenewable commodities:  

> prices become much higher than the costs to produce the resource, the
opposite situation from competitive markets in other kinds of commodities. Yet
resource owners restrain production without the need for a cartel or any
coordination.

This occurs because, under the Hotelling assumptions that the commodity is not
renewable and cannot be substituted for (and of secure property rights, as
David Friedman correctly points out) the commodity producer can choose between
producing today or keeping it in the ground to produce tommorrow, with no fear
of permanently losing sales to some competitor. Any sales lost to a competitor
today draws down the competitor's fixed stores and can be recouped at any time
in the future.  
  
What the Hotelling model does not properly account for is that these very
characteristics also make these goods great substitutes or hedges for money.
Hotelling looks at a "fixed" or "prevailing" interest rate, but we should
really be looking at expectations of future interest rates, taking into
account expectations of future inflation. And we should account for changes in
these expectations. If we do so, I think we will find the model to have high
explanatory power (albeit not high predictive power, since we can't outguess
the market about future monetary conditions -- but the search for predictive
as opposed to explanatory power in economic models is largely futile anyway).  
  
Imagine a world with two currencies C1 and C2 and two nonrenewable minerals,
M1 and M2. C1 money supply outstrips money demand by 10%/year, and for C2 by
5%/year (in other words, C1 "inflates" or "falls" by 10%/year and C2 by
5%/year). If the price has not properly increased to account for future
expected inflation, people will prefer holding M1 and M2 to holding either of
the currencies. They will play "hot potato" with the currencies: as soon as
they obtain a currency in trade, they will try to purchase M1 or M2 with it.
All holders of M1 or M2 will demand a stiff premium to exchange their minerals
for falling currencies. What premium will they charge? In theory, the
inflation premium is infinite: it is a "net present value" calculation of the
depreciation of the currency into the infinite future. In practice, (as with
the St. Petersburg paradox, and because no commodity is perfectly nonrenewable
or perfectly immune to substitution over the long term), the premium will just
be very high: not only far higher than the cost of production, but also far
higher than the Hotelling model under the assumption of no inflation.
Inflation expectations will dominate the prices of M1 and M2 in C1 and C2.  
  
Now imagine that inflation expectations change. If expectations of inflation
in C2 to infinity go down from 5% to zero, we have in theory a change of net
present value of revenue streams from M1 and M2 in currency C2 from infinity
to zero, and in practice just a very high drop. It takes only a small change
in inflation expectations to send the prices of M1 and M2 in C1 and C2 soaring
or plummeting.  
  
Since the standard Hotelling model predicts no abrubt price changes, and the
monetary model does, the monetary model is a better choice for explaining the
actual dramatic price movements in relatively nonrenewable commodities such as
oil that we have observed.  
  
Under imperfect information, since we have far better information about
geology and technology than we do about future monetary conditions, and since
uncertainty in monetary conditions produces far greater price changes than
uncertainty about geology and technology, we can again conclude that abrupt
changes such as we've seen are due almost entirely to changes in monetary
expectations rather than in "fundamentals".  
  
Furthermore, when we see dramatic changes across a wide variety of
commodities, being led by the less renewable commodities like oil, Occam's
Razor (or equivalently, basic probability) tells us that there are not 100
different explanations for why 100 different commodities have all gone up
dramatically. Rather, we need only two quite related explanations: changes in
inflation and inflation expectations for the currencies they are priced in.  
  
Two commodities that come relatively close to being Hotelling nonrenwable
commodities are gold and oil. For gold, the above-ground stockpiles are far
greater than the annual production. For oil, the below-ground stockpiles are
far greater than the annual production. The price of gold has always
historically been dominated by its role as money, monetary substitute, or
hedge, or equivalent, and the price of oil is also coming to be so in an age
of floating currencies and in the current decade of rising inflation
expectations. When we realize that Hotelling nonrenewable goods make better
long-term stores of value than less renewable commodities, we can explain why,
while all commodities have dramatically risen over the last three years, the
surge in oil has been disproportionately dramatic, and even more dramatic than
the rise of gold: the rise in oil combines an increasing use of oil as an
inflation hedge (mostly by the producers themselves curtailing production),
which effects oil but not gold (which has long been used this way), with
increasing inflation expectations (which effect both gold and oil, and other
commodities to a lesser extent).  
  
It is often noted, in rebuttal to the theory that the falling dollar is mostly
responsible for commodity price rises, that the dollar has fallen less gainst
the euro, or against a basket of other currencies, than oil and many other
commodities have risen in dollar terms. In other words, oil and most other
commodities have also risen in euro terms, just less so. There are a number of
problems with this argument as a way of dismissing monetary causes.  
  
The first problem is that these statistics only record falls relative to other
currencies. It assumes there is some currency out there, or some basket of
currencies, that is a stable standard of value that we can measure against.
But there isn't. It's quite possible, and indeed currently quite probable,
that the euro etc. supply has also inflated (relative to demand for the
currency), so that all major currencies are falling relative to a hypothetical
stable standard of value. They are just falling by on average less than the
dollar is falling. Just because there is no standard to measure them against
doesn't mean they can't collectively fall (or equivalently, that they can't
all collectively inflate, as defined by greater supply, less demand, or both
for the currency).  
  
Also important is that the euro is too new and untested by time, and other
currencies too small, for them to make good substitutes for the dollar. So
when the dollar starts becoming dodgy, people turn to commodities to hedge
debt denominated in unreliable currencies (which currently means practically
all debt -- not just "junk" debt). So we have three monetary factors each
causing commodity prices in dollars to rise:  
  
(1) More dollars chasing the same (in the short term relatively inelastic)
supply of commodities. This directly effects only the dollar prices.  
  
(2) Greater demand for commodities as a substitute or hedge for currency-
denominated debt, to hedge against further possible inflation. Small changes
in inflation expectations, as discussed above, can have large impacts on
commodity prices. This increases commodity prices in all currencies.  
  
(3) A flight to safety from the credit crunch, creating more demand for safer
forms of debt (e.g. U.S. Treasuries), and thus even more demand for
commodities to hedge the currency risk from holding that debt. This increases
commodity prices in all currencies.  
  
No "manipulation" or irrational "speculation" is required to explain commodity
prices, and there may not even be a bubble (although a bubble could easily
arise under such conditions of high uncertainty). Rising commodity prices, and
in particular the disproportionate surge in oil, are mostly or entirely just a
rational and efficient response to the poor state of the world's floating
currencies and the credit crunch.  
  
(This post is based on previous comments I have made at other blogs, including
in response to Hal's post linked to above).

