n.b.: if anybody would like good customized financial advise, I am available
as a consultant at reasonable rates. Meanwhile, here is a free sample of some
generalized financial opinions:  
  
Clayton:  
 _To protect it, I could move it into gold, oil or the market but each option
seems frightening. Gold has doubled in price since 2 1/2 years ago, but the
money supply has not doubled since then, so there does seem to be some
"bubble" in the headline price of gold._  
  
There is, alas, no safe place to put your money, and even less is the money
itself safe. As some wag recently put it, "the Federal Reserve has turned us
all into speculators."  
  
Precious metals, oil, and to a lesser extent other commodities move based on
_expectation_ of _future_ money supply moves, not just on today's money
supply. That makes them more volatile than changes in today's money supply.
That's also why exchange rates for floating currencies are so volatile.
Indeed, it is profitable to think of oil, gas, and precious metals prices as
just another set of currency exchange rates. Even with great geological
ignorance we can be far more certain about future supplies of these
commodities than of future supplies of floating currencies.  
  
We've just gone through a period of the 1980s and 1990s where floating
currencies behaved well, and most investors concluded that the 1970s was a
fluke. We now see the 1970s being repeated in terms of increasing money supply
and other risky central bank behavior. It now appears that 1970s-style
inflation, and dangers of hyperinflation, may now be just as normal under
floating currencies as the placid 80's and 90's. So the recent commodity rise
reflects not just the increase in money supply over demand but the increased
expectations for future such increases. Follow the link above labelled "a
small change in inflation expectations can cause a very large change in
commodity prices" for more explanation of this.  
  
For the small investor I suggest three main possibilities for hedging savings
accounts or bonds in floating currencies:  
  
(1) Commodity index ETFs. Any good online brokerage should be allowing you to
buy these just like you'd buy shares in stock. There is however some political
risk that the expenses of these funds will be substantially increased by new
legislation over the next year or two, so keep tabs on their expenses. Also,
given the great uncertainties involved in guessing future inflation, these
commodity baskets will be very volatile (either up or down) and I don't reject
a strong possibility that some of the price reflects a bubble. Bubbles tend to
occur in conditions of high uncertainty, whether it was uncertainty about the
dot-com revolution, lack of knowledge about the moral hazard in real estate
securitization, or today's high uncertainty about future inflation. For the
same reason though, commodities may still be undervalued. Bottom line is that
their prices will change far more quickly up or down than the consumer prices
of most things you will want to buy with your savings, but since they tend to
change in the same direction they are useful for hedging future inflation.  
  
(2) Gold or silver coins. I am normally not a gold bug, but I have a hunch
precious metals may be a bit undervalued right now: central banks have been
dampening the market by selling more of it, and the retail gold ads that were
popular a few months ago are mostly gone today, relieving my worries about a
gold bubble. Today's political risks are now focused on consumable commodity
markets and they will probably leave gold alone. Indeed, a law shutting down
pension fund etc. investment in consumable commodities might greatly boost the
price of gold and silver, as they would be the main alternative for the funds
to invest in to get the same kind of anti-correlative hedge for their bond
positions.  
  
(3) If you can afford it without a risky loan, foreclosed or otherwise
distressed real estate, in areas where foreclosures are not above the average
and where people don't have long commutes to work.  
  
I don't recommend putting most of your assets "long" in any of the above: they
are there to hedge your long dollar positions, or somewhat equivalently to
replace about a third of your dollar savings accounts or bonds; i.e. money
that you are likely to spend in less than three years.  
  
If you are saving money to be spent farther into the future, most of your
savings should be in stocks, real estate, and collectibles, with well over
half of that in stocks. Even if you have, say, just $500 of long-term savings
it should be long a stock index ETF. If you have enough money to pick your own
diversified portfolio of individual stocks, for U.S. stocks I suggest heavy
exporters (including many Internet and other companies providing services to
overseas customers): they profit from a relatively weak dollar.

