The emperors were commanders-in-chief of the legions and could have, if they
so wished, commanded the legions to forcibly disband the Guards and then could
have chosen replacements. Some, such as Septimus Severus when he defeated
Didianus Julianus, did replace them wholesale, and a much later emperor,
Constantine, also fresh from winning the a civil war in which the Guard was on
the other side, disbanded the Guard, replacing it with another organization.  
  
Assassination was a common way to attack enemies or gain power; the emperors
especially kept in mind the famous assassination of Julius Caesar. So having
something like the Guard around was essential, as was paying them generously
for their loyalty.  
  
The Praetorian Guard was usually quite effective at guarding the emperor after
the emperor was already in power, and as long as they were well-paid and not
threatened by the legions (as in the cases of Septimus Severus and
Constantine). But in successions the Guard often insisted on playing king-
maker, supporting the candidate who made the most generous and credible
promises to them (the auction above being only the most blatant example of
this). The legions often got in on this power grab too, resulting in frequent
civil wars. Five emperors in one year was unusual, but violent successions
were common.  
  
Guardians in modern democracies, such as the Secret Service in the U.S. don't
act similarly I suppose because leaders are temporary and both they and the
"legions" (armed forces) swear oaths to uphold constitutions, whereas the
Guard and Legions swore oaths to be loyal to an emperor (oaths not respected
or reliably enforced once the emperor was dead). Also, the will of the mob has
a thuggish power far exceeding that of any daring individual, and democracy
has a religious aspect whereby assassination is considered much more of a
sacrilege than it was in Rome, where assassinations of unpopular emperors such
as Commodus were widely celebrated. Also, leaders in modern democracies
besides being temporary also otherwise have much less power than emperors
whose will was law, so that there is much less to gain by killing them. We do
still have the occasional assassination, but generally because the top alpha
male is the lightning rods of modern society and focuses the ire of many,
including of some nutjobs, rather than because assassinations are still
important ways to gain power -- they no longer are.

