Here are some thougts about irreducible complexity and society. There's quite
a bit more I could say about this, and some day I will. This is just a very
brief introduction to what I've been thinking about for several years, and
some tentative conclusions about it.  
  
Friedrich Hayek called the hubristic ideas of social scientists, that they
could explain and plan the details of society (including economic production),
their "fatal conceit." He informally analyzed the division of knowledge to
explain why the wide variety of businesses in our economy cannot be centrally
planned. "The peculiar character of the problem of a rational economic order
is determined precisely by the fact that the knowledge of the circumstances of
which we must make use never exists in concentrated or integrated form but
solely as the dispersed bits of incomplete and frequently contradictory
knowledge which all the separate individuals possess." The economic problem is
"a problem of the utilization of knowledge which is not given to anyone in its
totality." Austrian economists like Hayek usually eschewed the use of
traditional mathematics to describe the economy because such use assumes that
economic complexities can be reduced to a small number of axioms.  
  
  
 _Friedrich Hayek, the Austrian economist and philosopher who discussed the
use of knowledge in society._  
  
Modern mathematics, however -- in particular algorithmic information theory --
clarifies the limits of mathematical reasoning, including models with infinite
numbers of axioms. The mathematics of irreducible complexity can be used to
formalize the Austrians' insights. Here is an introduction to algorithmic
information theory, and further thoughts on measuring complexity.  
  
Sometimes information comes in simple forms. The number 1, for example, is a
simple piece of data. The number pi, although it has an infinite number of
digits, is similarly simple, because it can be generated by a short finite
algorithm (or computer program). That algorithm fully describes pi. However, a
large random number has an irreducible complexity. Gregory Chaitin discovered
a number, Chaitin's omega, which although it has a simple and clear definition
(it's just a sum of probabilities that a random computer program will halt)
has an irreducibly infinite complexity. Chaitin proved that there is no way to
completely describe omega in a finite manner. Chaitin has thus shown that
there is no way to reduce mathematics to a finite set of axioms. Any
mathematical system based on a finite set of axioms (e.g. the system of simple
algebra and calculus commonly used by non-Austrian economists) overly
simplifies mathematical reality, much less social reality.  
  
Furthermore, we know that the physical world contains vast amounts of
irreducible complexity. The quantum mechanics of chemistry, the Brownian
motions of the atmosphere, and so on create vast amounts of uncertainty and
locally unique conditions. Medicine, for example, is filled with locally
unique conditions often known only very incompletely by one or a few
hyperspecialized physicians or scientists.  
  
  
 _Ray Solomonoff and Gregory Chaitin, pioneers of algorithmic information
theory._  
  
The strategic nature of the social world means that it will contain
irreducible complexity even if the physical world of production and the
physical needs of consumption were simple. We can make life open-endedly
complicated for each other by playing penny matching games. Furthermore,
shared information might be false or deceptively incomplete.  
  
Even if we were perfectly honest and altruistic with each other, we would
still face economies of knowledge. A world of more diverse knowledge is far
more valuable to us than a world where we all had the same skills and beliefs.
This is the most important source of the irreducible complexity of knowledge:
the wealthier we are, the greater the irreducibly complex amount of knowledge
(i.e. diversity of knowledge) society has about the world and about itself.
This entails more diversity of knowledge in different minds, and thus the
greater difficulty of coordinating economic behavior.  
  
The vastness of the useful knowledge in the world is far greater than our
ability to store, organize, and communicate that knowledge. One limitation is
simply how much our brains can hold. There is far more irreducible and
important complexity in the world than can be held in a single brain. For this
reason, at least some of this omplexity is impossible to share between human
minds.  
  
The channel capacity of human language and visual comprehension are further
limited. This often makes it impossible to share irreducibly complex knowledge
between human minds even if the mind could in theory store and comprehend that
knowledge. The main barrier here is the inability to articulate tacit
knowledge, rather than limitations of technology. However, the strategic and
physical limits to reducing knowledge are of such vast proportions that most
knowledge could not be fully shared even with ideal information technology.
Indeed, economies of knowledge suggest that the proportion of knowledge would
be even less widely shared in a very wealthy world of physically optimal
computer and network technology than it is today -- although the absolute
amount of knowledge shared would be far greater, the sum total of knowledge
would be far greater still, and thus the proportion optimally shared would be
smaller.  
  
The limitations on the distribution of knowledge, combined with the
inexhaustible sources of irreducible complexity, mean that the wealthier we
get, the greater the unique knowledge stored in each mind and shared with few
others, and the smaller fraction of knowledge is available to any one mind.
There are a far greater variety of knowledge "pigeons" which must be stuffed
into the same brain "pigeonholes," and thus less room for "cloning pigeons"
through mass media, mass education, and the like. Wealthier societies take
greater advantage of long tails (i.e., they satisfy a greater variety of
preferences) and thus become even less plannable than poorer societies that
are still focused on simpler areas such as agriculture and Newtonian industry.
More advanced societies increasingly focus on areas such as interpersonal
behaviors (sales, law, etc.) and medicine (the complexity of the genetic code
is just the tip of the iceberg; the real challenge is the irreducibly complex
quantum effects of biochemistry, ~~for example theprotein folding problem).
~~. Both interpersonal behaviors and medicine are areas where our demand is
insatiable and supply is based on the internalization of vast irreducible
complexity. This is not to say that further breakthroughs in simplifying the
world from which we are supplied, such as those of Newtonian physics and the
industrial revolution, are not possible; but to achieve them we will have to
search through vastly larger haystacks. Furthermore, once these breakthroughs
are made supply will become cheap and demand quickly satiated; then we will be
back to trying to satisfy our higher-order and inexhaustible preferences using
a supply of largely irreducible complexity.

