George, the lack of ability to credibly commit to choosing the "most
favorable" market does indeed sound like another big problem with futarchy,
but it does seem quite related to the lack of ability to define a firm formula
for judging the "most favorable", which in turn is quite related to the moral
hazard of, to go back to my example, GM goosing the "GM bailout" market (what
Mencius is calling "bears", which I define as people trading because they have
a large stake in the decision and thus willing to lose a lesser expected
amount of money in the decision market in order to win a greater expected
amount of benefit from a favorable decision).  
  
Incidentally, "bears" is a preposterously misleading metaphor, as is the
"wolves" label for mere arbitrageurs, since the "bears" are the real predators
in this market for coercive decisions, while the "wolves" are providing the
benefit of useful information. When one sees thoughtless metaphors like this
being thrown around like this and not criticized, one can tell that there is
much light that needs to be shed on this subject.  
  
If to return to our example the GM bailout contract is trading at 0.02% above
the economists' consensus GDP growth, and the Tesla Motors bailout contract at
0.01% above, should we pick the GM bailout over the Tesla bailout contract
(assuming we only have budget for one bailout), or do legislators get to make
a judgment call that the GM premium reflects their much lobbying power than
Tesla and pick the Tesla bailout? If the numbers are reversed, can our
legislators decide that it is completely irrational to suppose that a tiny
company like Tesla can have a bigger impact than a behemoth like GM and again
ignore the market's seeming judgment?  
  
Robin: _I've published a number of papers on theory and lab experiments about
manipulation; you seem to think them completely irrelevant, since you ignore
them and go on to construct your own analysis. Why?_  
Robin, you've made a proposal that would coercively impact me if implemented.
I am under no obligation to undergo intellectual hazing exercises before
critiquing it.  
  
Your proposal is straightforward enough; understanding it does not require the
reading the highly obscure justifications you have written for the target
audience of journal referees from a particular academic school of thought. Big
political ideas like this should be addressed from many different sets of
assumptions before being tried on a large scale. It is often far more
efficient and useful to just approach it from my angle, or for Mencius to
approach it from his, than trying to reverse-engineer your particular set of
hidden assumptions from your obscure papers.  
  
Since your more intelligible summaries and blog posts seem to clearly reflect
some bad assumptions (such as idea that there is such a thing as a useful
prediction market that is not also a decision market, or that the distinction
between coercive and voluntary decisions is not only not crucial and central
to the whole debate, but is not even worth commenting on, or your lack of
discussion of moral hazards such as the assassination market problem), I have
no reason to believe your papers justifying futarchy don't make the same bad
assumptions.  
  
_Robin: ... zero-sum speculation would unravel to no trade if not for four
factors: hedging, irrational traders, manipulators, and direct trading
subsidies._  
Do you mean all four factors have to be present, or any one of them, or just a
sufficient weighted sum of them? As for the irrational traders, the
entertainment value that motivates the play in OnTrade etc. that TGGP observes
would be utterly dwarfed by the vast financial resources and incentives of
those impacted by government decisions. (It may even be the case that some
OnTrade contracts are already dominated by "bears" and bear arbitrageurs if
some decisions of government officials are already being influenced by these
estimates).

