When we hear the word "authority" we often think of people who have set
themselves up in positions of power and on whom we have become dependent. But
there is another kind of authority, often more reliable and trustworthy, that
can be provided by things. These are physical standards, security devices,
automata, and other objects by which we coordinate our interactions with
fellow humans, especially with strangers who might not otherwise be
trustworthy. These technologies are crucial to our modern civilization and its
ability to make dealings with strangers more secure and reliable.  
  
Authoritative automata often come in the form of what (on a computer) Mark
Miller has dubbed an admonition system. An admonition system reminds a person
of a plan or of a legal or ethical obligation. A clock, for example, can
remind a person of a scheduled meeting, and a cash register communicates an
obligation to pay.  
  
With some extra security a device may also provide a strong affordance that
requires the person to act purposefully to use it or to avoid using it, and
may also gather evidence of such use or avoidance, as with tamper evidence. A
locked door, for example, reminds a person about whether they have consent to
enter, makes accidental entry effectively impossible, and often requires those
who enter anyway to leave behind evidence of lock picking or forcible entry.  
  
Some technologies create standards that we all come to follow, as in standard
weights and measures. Old unforgeably costly standards, such as those of
shells used in hunter-gatherer and Neolithic cultures and the gold standard
used up to modern times, enabled the emergence of money to replace barter and
other costly and inconvenient in-kind transactions. Physical standards provide
objective, verifiable, and repeatable interactions with our physical
environment and with each other.  
  
When new kinds of authoritative automata are proposed, the robotic response of
Hello Kitty people is that they are inflexible and impersonal and thus not to
be trusted. The Roman playwright Plautus made fun of early complainer of this
kind, a bum objecting to one of the earliest authoritative devices, the
sundial:  

> The gods confound the man who first found out  
> How to distinguish the hours. Confound him too,  
> Who in this place set up a sundial,  
> To cut and hack my days so wretchedly  
> Into small pieces! When I was a boy,  
> My belly was my sundial -- only surer,  
> Truer, and more exact than any of them.  
> This dial told me when 'twas the proper time  
> To go to dinner, when I ought to eat;  
> But nowadays, why even when I have,  
> I can't fall to unless the sun gives leave.  
> The town's so full of these confounded dials!

But history teaches that it is the many people who act strategically against
strangers who are not to be trusted. It is human preferences, not machines,
that are unpredictable and incomparable, as well they should be. For
coordinating our interactions with strangers, impartial automata are often
crucial.  
To what extent will computer algorithms come to serve as authorities? We've
already seen one algorithm that has been in use for centuries: the adding
algorithm in adding machines and cash registers. Some other authoritative
algorithms have become crucial parts of the following:  
  
(1) All the various protocols network applications use to talk to each other,
such the web browser protocol you are probably using right now,  
  
(2) The system that distributes domain names (the name of a web site found in
an URL) and translate them to Internet protocol (IP) addresses -- albeit, not
the ability to register domain names in the first place, which is still
largely manual,  
  
(3) Ranking algorithms such as Google page rank (for relevance based on a
particular text search) and popularity ranking algorithms such as those used
by Digg, Reddit, and the like,  
  
(4) Payment systems, such as credit card processing and PayPal,  
  
(5) Time distribution networks and protocols,  
  
(6) The Global Positioning System (GPS) for determining location based on the
time it takes radio signals to travel from a orbiting satellites, and  
  
(7) A wide variety of other algorithms that many of us rely on to coordinate
our activities.  
  
Algorithms give us the potential of moving beyond the weak and reactive
security of most physical devices to strong and often preventative security.
Technologies such as digital signatures and mulitparty private computation may
be used to implement things like unalterable audit trails, smart contracts,
secure and owner-controlled property title registries, and so on. Bit gold, or
property titles to unforgeably costly bits, might be possible. These automata
will rely more on distribution and protocol security and less on trusted third
parties than traditional authorities. There is a strong argument to be made
that algorithmic authorities should be open source.  
  
We've just scratched the surface of what secure authorities we can establish
over computer networks. Such authorities will make it far easier for 6 billion
plus strangers to interact with each other securely and reliably.

