Peter, I agree that there can be temporary supply/demand imbalances in oil not
reflected in the gold price, since oil is not nearly as easy to store or
transport and is subject to more frequent political risks to drilling,
storage, and transport. One can cleary see some oil spikes in the record not
accompanied by gold spikes. But these are all short-term departures; over the
medium and long term gold and oil prices are highly correlated.  
  
My hypotheses are that  
  
(1) monetary factors are a much larger factor than other medium- or long-term
changes in supply and demand (such as industrial demand or
geological/technological conditions of supply) in the price moves of mineral
commodities (including oil) priced in fiat currencies, and  
  
(2) a substantial fraction of the prices of oil and other mineral commodities
in recent commodity booms (as well as, more obviously, those of precious
metals) reflects their use as substitutes for currency and currency-
denominated debt (as well as, less obviously, currency-linked equity) as a
store of value. The current price of storable and near-term inelastic
commodities would be much lower if they were demanded merely for consumption.  
  
The supply elasticity and storage costs of mineral commodities differ, so I
don't expect these commodities to move in a fully correlated manner in
response to changing expectations of money supply. But those with similar
elasticities and storage costs will be more closely correlated.  
  
These hypotheses aren't contradicted by the temporary supply/demand hiccups
reflected in futures time-curves. Dollar prices have risen dramatically, from
1999 to today, in all parts of the oil futures time-curve and all parts of the
gold futures curve, as dollar supply has increased (to combat the millenium
bug, the dot-com crash, and now the housing crash), and they have risen far
faster than the CPI, as my hypotheses predict. Commodities in the 1980s
crashed merely from dollar supply growth beyond demand being substantially
slowed, as predicted by my second hypothesis (most of the relative value of
commodities as a store of value disappeared).  
  
My hypotheses also predict that if we adjust for the different shapes of the
future curves, to eliminate these temporary oil flow hiccups, the price of
gold and oil move in an even more correlated manner. That would be an
interesting study to do.  
  
It's also possible, but I'm speculating now, that the curve of oil futures is
downward sloping because of the current credit crisis and accompanying big
injections of money from central banks. By this speculative idea the curve
reflects that this credit crisis will probably lessen in future months and
years, as will the injections of currency, thus storable oil is needed now
more than later to serve as a store of value. If so, only commodities like oil
with relatively high storage costs will have downward-sloping futures curves,
whereas precious metals retain the normal upward-sloping curves due to lower
costs of spot/future arbitrage. I haven't proven to myself that this really
works, but it's an idea to ponder.  
  
Richard, I again thank you for your wonderful encouragement!

