Good question. BTW I've clarified the graph by changing the Y-axis label to
"food production labor productivity" from "per capita nutrition" which was
misleading for the most recent two points.  
  
The Malthusian trap is that the labor productivity of food production (which
did correspond to per capita nutrition before the British revolution) tended
to always return to subsistence levels or very close to it (the bottom third
of the graph).  
  
Going from hunter-gatherer to Neolithic, for example, while in terms of
technology and institutions was an advance of civilization to more productive
use of each natural global hectare, meant after the resulting population
growth each individual worked longer to produce less food: food production
labor productivity was lowered. That was the normal pathological Malthusian
outcome: major advances in technology and institutions didn't greatly improve
and indeed could lower per capita income in the long run.  
  
The 19th century British were indeed revolutionary because they were the first
living population self-sufficient in food to break far away from subsistence
level food production labor productivity while at the same time increasing
their population at about the maximum natural human rate.  
  
In other words, not only did they radically move the isocline to the
"northwest", as the Neolithic revolution had done, but unlike prior
revolutions they (and we in the developed world today) have avoided the
previous inevitable slide down the isocline to the low food production labor
productivity seen in even advanced civilizations like China and the ancient
Roman empire. This radical revolution in food production labor productivity is
what allows us to have, as you point out, a vast population not themselves
involved in food production, but working to satisfy "higher" needs, i.e. in
industry, transportation, and a wide variety of services. Unlike any other
organisms human or otherwise who have ever lived on this planet.  
  
How the Brits (with much borrowing from others of course) did this is the
mystery I hope to tackle in future posts.

