While I'm here, I (inspired by a real legal case I learned from a friend, who
shall remain nameless unless he wants to be credited) came up with the
following example that lays the problem with the Coase Theorem out in clear
mathematical terms even in a fairly normal case of externalities (i.e. nothing
"extreme" like flamethrowers or clover-killing herbicide or mob hits):  
  
A music store is next door to a doctor's office. The music store would prefer
(if the office of a rich doctor who wants quiet for his patients did not exist
next door) to let its customers test its electric guitars at volume VM1 > 0.
The doctor prefers it to be quieter (VD < VM1). Coase theory assumes that the
only possible choices are within the range {VM1, VD}, i.e. any volume of
electric guitar testing in between or including these two preferences. In the
absence of transaction costs and given only this range, one can indeed
conclude that the music store and the doctor will bargain to an efficient
outcome. But these aren't the only choices. The music store can, at additional
cost to itself C, turn up the volume nobs on its amplifiers and play the music
at volume VM2 > VM1. If the doctor is willing to pay the music store P1 to
change the volume from VM1 to VD, and P2 > P1 + C to turn the volume down from
VM2 to VD, the music store has an incentive to play the music at volume VM2
instead of VM1, or to threaten same, in order to extract for itself a greater
benefit from the situation.  
  
In other words, the same physical effect that produced the externality gives
rise to an opportunity and incentive to play a negative-sum game. Here it
changes the music store's prefered volume in the absence of a rich doctor next
door from VM1, to VM2 > VM1, due to the opportunity to extort extra payments
from the doctor by creating an even less bearable din, for which the doctor is
willing to pay even more to avoid. The music store is willing to incur an
extra cost C to itself in order to extract the greater payment P2 from the
doctor. For the overall game the payment P2 is a wash and C makes it negative-
sum. (In the music store example, cost C comes from the music store chasing
away some of its own customers, albeit at a slower rate than it chases away
the doctor's customers, by testing its guitars more noisly than it would
prefer in the absence of the doctor).  
  
If, as in reality, there are transaction costs causing bargains to sometimes
not be reached, the outcome is even worse, as noise VM2 is costlier, perhaps
far more costlier, to the doctor's practice than VM1: such outcomes are often
far worse outcome under transaction costs than the range of possible outcomes
that Coaseians contemplate.  
  
Of course, more generally in the absence of proper prior legal allocations of
rights the doctor and music store could threaten each other in other ways: the
doctor could threaten to poison the guitar frets, the music store could call
in the mob on the doctor, etc.  
(Furthermore, even with tort law preventing these other negative-sum games the
music store has an incentive to falsely "reveal" preference VM2 instead of VM1
to the doctor and to the judge -- a common problem that good tort law usually,
but hardly with perfection, tackles). But the example of the music store and
its amplifier volume shows that the externality itself contains potential or
actual coercion -- the same physical effect that causes the externality often
makes negative-sum games possible, and in the absence of any prior legal
limits on the externality, opportunities and incentives for coercive negative-
sum games are inherent in the externality -- so that analyses of such
externalities with the Coase Theorem, which assumes such games don't exist,
will often lead to misleading or false conclusions.

