This blog has never before expressed an opinion about a specific political
election. Unenumerated takes a long view and electioneering is generally not
the most effective means of political action. Occasionally, however, there is
a remarkable exception. Ron Paul's candidacy for President of the United
States is the most remarkable such exception of our era.  
  
Among the makeup-encrusted crop of TV-hyped politicians, Ron Paul stands alone
in working, not to propagate mass media mythologies, but to preserve and
restore our genuine freedoms and our highly evolved traditions. Where other
politicians go on and on about "freedom" in order to justify wars and
suppressions that deprive people of their lives, liberties, and properties,
Ron Paul throughout his long career has labored to preserve and restore our
freedoms. Ron Paul has worked to heal the wounds to liberty and the damages to
our essential institutions that were inflicted by barbaric politics over the
last century: the wars, the ethnic cleansings, the nationalizations, and the
corruptions that have worked in tandem to destroy many of the freedoms our
forefathers held dear. From property rights to privacy, the rights to bear
arms and defend ourselves and our loved ones, rights to speak freely via
technology old and new, rights to be free from false arrest and torture, the
list of freedoms we once held but are now losing is long. Without a
libertarian surge, a rising of people to rebuke the evils of the century now
thankfully over, the barbarity of that century will have become fixed as the
only reality we know, and we will be plunged into a long dark age.  
  
Because Ron Paul is the only presidential candidate who puts a high priority
on preserving and restoring property rights, the bedrock institution of modern
economies, it is no surprise that he recently raised more money in a single
day than any other person in U.S. political history. Ron Paul is the only
presidential candidate in touch both with our highly evolved past and our
networked future. He has moved beyond the mass-media prejudices that caused
the twentieth century to march lock-step into genocidal wars and
nationalization. So it is no surprise that Ron Paul's main strength is on the
Internet and his main weakness is in the mass media.  
  
Even if, as mass media polls currently imply, Ron Paul does not win the 2008
Republican nomination, his staying power and independence give him the
potential to exert a libertarian influence on United States politics far
beyond recent experience. Even if he doesn't win a single state, Paul is
demonstrating that he has a substantial and loyal following. He will stay in
the race to the very end, and Republicans will have to make valuable
concessions to prevent him from becoming an independent candidate who would
throw the election. No one man can heal the many injuries that freedom has
suffered, nor the many damages that have been done to our highly evolved
institutions. But Ron Paul's success will inspire many more lovers of our once
and future liberties to step forward and make that future.  
  
United States politics is delicately balanced between the traditional poles of
right and left and may only need a small shove to push it in the orthogonal
libertarian direction. This is particularly true with respect to the
institution with the most impact on our freedoms: the Supreme Court. If Paul
falls short of becoming the Republican candidate I recommend to him that he
request one or more Supreme Court nominees of his choice as the price of his
support for the non-libertarian Republican candidate. On the Supreme Court
there are four justices on the traditional left and four on the traditional
right. As a result the one moderate justice, Justice Kennedy, exerts an
overwhelmingly disproportionate influence. Four years of libertarian influence
on the Presidency, with two or three seats on the Court up for grabs, could
tilt the Court quite heavily towards a restoration of our libertarian
Constitution, a restoration of life, liberty, and property rights in the
United States.  
  
Uniquely among mainstream politicians, Ron Paul thinks beyond mass media hype.
He remembers and cares about the basic institutions that have made the United
States a bastion of world liberty for most of the last 231 years, and will
make it a "Shining City on a Hill" again in the future if we work to make it
so. For those who love our once and future freedoms, now is the time to
strike. Work and vote to elect Ron Paul for President in 2008.

