

Outside of the financial cryptography community, and long predating it, there
is a deep tradition of protocols used in the course of performing contracts.
These protocols consist of a flow of forms ("data flow", canonically displayed
in data flow diagrams), along with checks and procedures called "controls".
Controls serve many of the same functions as cryptographic protocols:
integrity, authorization, and so on. This article uses "control protocols" or
simply "controls" to refer to this combination of data flow and controls.

Control protocols, and the professions of auditing and accounting [ 2 ] based
on them, play a critical but ill-analyzed role in our economy. Economists lump
them, along with other costs of negotiating and ensuring the performance of
contracts, under their catch-all rubric of "transaction costs". But without
controls, large corporations and the economies of scale they create would not
be possible. Controls allow a quarrelsome species ill-suited to organizations
larger than small tribes to work together on vast projects like manufacturing
jumbo jets and running hospitals. These control protocols are the result of
many centuries of business experience and have a long future ahead of them,
but the digital revolution will soon cause these paper-era techniques to be
dramatically augmented by, and eventually integrated into, smart contracts.

Controls enable auditing of contract performances, allowing more precise
inference of the behavior of an agent. Auditing is costly, so it is undertaken
by random sampling. Economists study the substitutability between the
probability of verifying a breach and the magnitude of legal fines, where
physical enforcement is used. Conceivably, one could substitute increasingly
high penalties for increasingly rarer and less expensive auditing. However,
this is not robust to real-world conditions of imperfect information.

Since controls primarily address the implicit contracts between employees and
employer, there is little mapping from contract to control. A secondary
function of controls to to monitor contracts with other organizations. Here
there is some mapping, but it is confounded by the integration of the two
functions in most controls. Rather than based on contractual terms, controls
are typically based on managerial authorization.

Controls are typically based around amounts of money and quantities of goods.
A canonical control is double entry bookkeeping, where two books are kept, and
there must be arithmetic reconciliation between the books. To conceal an
irregularity, necessary to omit from both sides, or to record entries
offsetting the irregularity.

Notice that there is a problem distinguishing error from fraud. This problem
crops up in many areas in both auditing and smart contracts.

To illustrate, here are two common control techniques:

Imprest: this is a family of controls involving the receipt or disbursement of
bearer certificates (usually notes and coins). One example is the protocol
used at most movie theaters. Entry is segregated from payment by introducing
tickets and establishing two employee roles, the ticket seller in a booth, and
the ticket stub salesman at the entrance. Periodically, a bookkeeper
reconciles the number of tickets with the total paid. Discrepancy again
indicates fraud or error.

Customer audit: Techniques to get the customer to generate initial
documentation of a transaction. For example, pricing goods at $.99 forces the
employee to open the cash register to make change, generating a receipt.

A complete control protocol typically features the generation of initial
documentation, segregation of duties, and arithmetic reconciliation of
quantities of goods, standard service events, and money.

Of these, the segregation of duties deserves special comment.

It has long been recognized that an intermediary is more trustworthy when it
is distributed. In a large business, transactions are divided up so that no
single person can commit fraud. Segregation of duties is an instance of the
principle of required conspiracy. For example, the functions of
warehouse/delivery, sales, and receipt of payments are each performed by
different parties, with a policy that each party reports every transaction to
a fourth function, accounting. Any singular reported activity (e.g., delivery
without receipt of payment) indicates potential fraud (e.g., a delivery was
made to a customer and the payment pocketed instead of being put into the
corporate treasury). Segregation of duties is the auditor's favorite tool.
Where it is absent the auditor cries "foul", just as a good engineer would
react to a single point of failure. Many cryptographic systems have rightfully
gone down to commercial failure because they ground down to trust in a single
entity rather than segregating functions so as to require conspiracy.

There are least three significant differences between the scope and emphasis
of smart contracts and controls. Controls are paper-era protocols designed
around static forms, place little emphasis on confidentiality, and are based
on management authorizations rather than one-to-one relationships.

Smart contracts can be based on a wide variety of interactive protocols and
user interfaces, and can be involved in a wide variety of kinds of contractual
performance. Control protocols, developed in the era of paper, are based on
static forms passed as messages and processed in tables and spreadsheets.
Controls focus on money and counts of standardized goods and service events,
easily recorded by numbers and manipulated by arithmetic, while mostly
ignoring other kinds or aspects of contractual performance. Checksums on
numbers, the basis of reconciliation, are crude and forgeable compared to
cryptographic hashes. Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) keeps these static
forms and maintains reliance on controls. It uses cryptographic hashes for
nothing more sophisticated than integrity checks on individual messages.

Controls place little emphasis on confidentiality, at least in the modern
accounting literature. The emphasis on confidentiality in paper-era protocols
is lacking because violation of often implicit confidences, via replication of
data, was much more difficult with paper. Furthermore, technologies for
protecting confidentiality while auditing were not feasible. Businesses
traditionally trusted accounting firms with confidences, a trust that has
eroded over the last century, and will erode still further as accounting firms
start taking advantage of the vast amounts of inside and marketing information
they are collecting from their customers' databases during audits. Using
paper-based protocols in a digital world, there are few effective controls
against the auditors themselves. Post-unforgeable transaction logs and
multiparty secure computation indicate the possibility of cryptographic
protocols to implement less relavatory but more effective auditing trails and
controls; their use may be able to ameliorate the growing problems with data
mining and breach of confidentiality.

Auditors place quite a bit of trust in management to authorize transactions in
a secure and productive manner. Objecting to this dual trust in management and
distrust of employees inherent in the accounting tradition, there has been a
trend in the last two decades towards a loosening of controls as a part of
hierarchy flattening and empowerment of professional employees. Unfortunately,
loose controls have led to several recent scandals in the banking and
investment trade. The most recent view is that there must be a learned
tradeoff between controls and empowerment.

These traditional protocols have a long future ahead of them, for the
deceptively simple reason that they have a long past. They are highly evolved,
hundreds of years old (double-entry bookkeeping, for example, predates the
Renaissance). Smart contracts will incorporate many techniques and strategies
from control protocols, such as generation of an initial record, segregation
of duties, and reconciliation. It will not be long, however, before smart
contracts start augmenting and transforming traditional business procedures,
making a wide variety of new business structures possible and in the long run
replacing traditional controls.

2\. George H. Bodnar and William S. Hopwood, 1987.Accounting Information
Systems. 3rd ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

There is also a  formal language  useful in accounting for derivatives and
other sophsticated contracts.
