Z: "One thing I really don't like about blogs is that conversations tend to
have a "lifespan" of at most a couple of weeks. I'm very interested in this
topic, and I have many unanswered questions, but my guess is that few or no
people are ever going to even see this comment."  
  
The short lifespan for me comes because it's too much work to keep going back
to all my old posts to see if there are new comments. Luckily for us I had
some reason to come back to this one and caught yours here. Now lets see if
you come back and read this. :-)  
  
Z: "I still am not sure I understand precisely what is the difference, if any,
between the following three ways to allocate computational/storage/network
resources:  
  
* automated markets (agorics) e.g. Mojo Nation  
  
* distributed game-theoretic mechanism design e.g. BitTorrent  
  
* push the whole issue to a higher layer e.g. Amazon S3  
  
* nano-barter"  
  
Nano-barter is mostly just my own version of agorics that emphasizes the
necessity of obtaining user preferences in low mental transaction ways. Once
one has obtained good information on user preferences the lower limit on
granularity is extremely small (thus "nano" to distinguish from mere
"micropayments", or we also might call it "kiloherz commerce" or "megaherz
commerce" at some point).  
  
"Well, this is basically supposing that -- at least as far as economics goes
-- the computational agents that make up the market are indistinguishable from
human beings!"  
  
Even if computational agents could be intelligent like humans, which they are
nowhere close to being, they still couldn't read their masters' minds. They
have to tediously observe their master to get any useful information. This is
why a fully automated market that ignores user behaviors won't work. It will
be useless. A market or game mechanism that works has to be based on informed
rather than speculative guesses by the software about what users actually want
during this next microsecond.  
  
"they are at least capable of optimizing within a limited set of resources and
strategies."  
  
Not even this is true unless the agents have good information about their
masters' behaviors from which can at least crudely be guessed important unique
aspects of their masters' preferences.  
  
"What is necessary to enable any of these strategies later? I guess it is (a)
that the use of resource in question can be measured and (b) that it can be
programmatically allowed/denied."  
  
I'd say you need more to experiment with several approaches than to delay
decision. And the kind of measurement should also be something you experiment
with -- it would be foolish to commit to, say, charging by the gigabyte
(rather than by reliability, alacrity, or combinations of these or other
factors) early. In fact, an architecture that allows deploying new game
mechanisms or markets based on new proxy measures would be quite useful.

