George, David is free to to come over here and debate me, or to invite me to
debate at any other reasonable forum. Any readers who can't be convinced by a
straightforward proof are free to contact him to try to get him to try to find
a flaw in it. He won't be able to do so, so I doubt he'll respond, but you can
try.  
  
Clayton: _My conclusion is that the global anarchy of sovereign states
(relative to one another sovereign states are largely in a state of anarchy)
apparently constitute a positive-sum game. Therefore, the data indicate that
it is false that the absence of tort law entails a negative-sum game._  
  
First, it's a funny argument to try to defend anarcho-capitalism by invoking a
positive outcome produced by governments. That one set of coercions(modern
governments) usually lead to at least somewhat positive-sum overall outcomes
on average doesn't at all demonstrate that very different kinds of coercions
(e.g. legal protection agencies) will do so, much less that they will be even
better.  
  
Second, you're confusing the singular and the plural, the local game with the
overall outcome. I claimed that interactions between legal protection agencies
(and of course governments in the international sphere) involve negative sum
_games_ , plural. For example wars, embargoes, etc. or threats of same. I
didn't claim that they don't also involve some positive-sum games, nor did I
claim that the overall outcome under and between governments is negative-sum.  
  
Negative-sum games like war are impossible under the Coase Theorem. The Coase
Theorem is worse than useless for explaining international outcomes and
Friedman's use of the Coase theorem to try to predict the outcome between
legal protection agencies is similarly quite fallacious.  
  
Never have I made the obviously fallacious claim you impute to me, that the
overall outcome of a world that includes many negative-sum games is
necessarily negative sum. There may be a number of good explanations for why a
world with governments and international relations is usually positive-sum --
I suggest reading Mancur Olson for example -- but the Coase Theorem, which
assumes that negative-sum games like extortion, taxation, and war don't even
exist, is not anywhere close to being one of these reasonable explanations.  
  
These governments generally have tort law or similar internally that creates a
positive-sum environment. These positive-sum economic games made possible by
tort law usually more than offset the many negative-sum games that governments
play externally. It may also be the case that the dynamic of mixed negative-
and positive-sum games in international relations by themselves usually leads
to a mildly positive-sum outcome. None of this has anything to do with the
Coase Theorem: once negative-sum games can happen the Coase theorem is false.

