 _I constructed an unrealistic world in which transaction costs are
negligible_  
  
You did no such thing. As a quite necessary assumption of your analysis you
introduced as one of the properties of Nitropia a vaguely worded "pain in the
butt", which more thoughtfully put is the problem of keeping track of prices
in multiple currencies or barter, a part of mental transaction cots. As I have
described, these mental transaction costs give rise to the need for money.
Burying such assumptions and later ignoring them leads to lack of
understanding.  
  
To repeat myself quite clearly: in a perfectly efficient market, in other
words in a market where transaction costs are negligible, there is no need for
money. Your account, utterly dependent on an assumption of mental limitations
which quite clearly create a cost of transacting, and thus falling far short
of describing the economists' perfectly efficient market, does quite the
opposite of disproving this claim. Indeed, my critical analysis of your
account reconfirms it.  
  
 _Whereas gold is used nowhere, or at least hardly anywhere, as a Mengerian
medium of exchange. Yet it retains a monetary premium, or at least seems to,
which is the effect I sought to explain._  
  
I don't recall that you succeeded in describing how gold is now used, as a
store of value and as a transaction hedge (the latter being a kissing cousin
of use as a medium of exchange). As are many other commodities during times
when major fiat currencies are being inflated, as I have described.  
  
As for why gold itself is not used more often directly in contracts, the
primary reason is almost surely legal. The UCC and common law in the US, and
to a lesser extent CISG and its cousins internationally, have rules that tend
to assume the standard transaction is an exchange of goods or services for
government-issued money. Barter, which use of gold in a contract would for
most legal purposes be considered to be, puts transactions in often often
obscure legal categories and often leads to strange legal results. Negotiable
instruments "denominated" in gold usually cannot be enfored in the same ways.
Domestically, large-scale barter often encourages tax audits. The lowering of
currency exchange barriers has eliminated much of the old practice of barter
in international trade.  
  
Another probable reason is that for reasons of accounting stability companies
tend to favor contracts in currencies in which most of their other credits and
debits are denominated.  
  
The result is that contracts are made in fiat government currencies, in order
to take advantage of standard commercial laws and keep accounts stable. Where
the currency inflation risk over the lifetime of the contract is high enough,
as it often now is, and the currency risk of assets on the books is not
already hedged by liabilities, gold (and many other exchange-traded
commodities) are used to hedge the risk. Exchange-traded commodities,
especially those with less elastic supply curves over the lifetime of the
contract, are thus, in times of inflation, indirectly used as a medium of
exchange.

