MM,  
  
"China is in the early stages of a transition from lawlessness to law, and the
benefits are obvious."  
  
I'm glad we both recognize the importance of rule of law rather than arbitrary
rule. And as your China example suggests the most important parts of the law
are not the substantive but the procedural, including but hardly limited to
the laws of succession to political powers.  
  
"First principles tell me that these so-called checks-and-balances designs are
not in fact balanced, so I am unsurprised to learn from my history books that
they have."  
  
This strikes me as the crux of the problem: you're being severely misled by
the gross overextension of some simple set of first principles.
Intersubjective reality is not compressible to such simple forms without
severe loss of crucial bits. The praxeological axioms work great for most
macroeconomics but are not much good for anything else, and certainly not for
involuntary or otherwise very-high-exist-cost transactions. If you don't
believe me try reconciling the praxeological axioms with the blog post I just
wrote on legal procedure, which you said you agree with.  
  
Indeed, any simple set of first principles in intersubjective matters must
always be highly oversimplified. Even the corporations you laud have checks
and balances, some of them rather similar to governmental ones. As an antidote
to ideology I strongly recommend a good inductive dose of the history of
institutions instead.  
  
For starts I recommend a some posts of mine explaining checks and balances in
corporations:  
  
Separation of Duties  
The Principle of Least Authority  
  
Then I recommend the Wikipedia article on "Subject Matter Jurisdiction", which
will help shed light on my writings on jurisdiction as property. (Subject
matter, not territory, form the most important "boundary lines" of
jurisdictions).  
  
Then I recommend _Controlling the State_ by Scott Gordon: all about the
history of checks and balances in corporate-like governmental structures, i.e.
republics, from ancient Athens to Venice (which had an extremely interesting
model) to the U.S.

