We are going to have to wait longer for the U.S. Supreme Court's opinion on
the section 101 patentable subject matter jurisprudence of the last two
decades, in which the Federal Circuit sharply diverged from Supreme Court
precedent. That's because the Court dismissed _LabCorp. v. Metabolite_ on a
procedural "technical issue," namely LabCorp's failure to properly raise the
section 101 issue at the original trial. Justice Breyer, joined by Stevens and
Souter, wrote a strong dissent arguing that the case should be decided and the
patent's claim to a "law of nature" held invalid. This dissent looks like a
passing of the torch of section 101 enforcement from Stevens, the author of
_Parker v. Flook,_ __ to a new generation of justices. Breyer's opinion
suggests that he at least vaguely recognizes the _Neilson/Morse/Funk/Flook_
methodology, which the Federal Circuit has long rejected despite the many
Supreme Court precedents, including _Flook,_ that upheld it. I'll probably
analyze Breyer's dissent in a subsequent post.  
  
It is unknown where the other justices stand on section 101, although it's
probable that at least Ginsburg joined by some of the conservative justices
would have agreed with the Federal Circuit's jurisprudence and argued based on
dicta in _Diamond v. Chakrabarty_ that "anything under the sun" can be
patented. Instead, however, these justices agreed with the procedural
dismissal and thus avoided making an argument that Metabolite's claim to (as
the dissent accurately described it) "any test" combined with a "law of
nature" was valid.  
  
I find that, although I agree with the substance of the dissent (claim 13 is
invalid under section 101 as an attempt to patent a "law of nature," and it's
not even a close call), I agree with the majority that this case should be
dismissed for failure to properly raise the issue at trial level. Rather than
specifically raise section 101, LabCorp engaged in vague hand-waving at the
trial level. At the Federal Circuit level it made a 101-type argument and
cited some 101 cases, but inexplicably still failed to directly cite section
101! It's grossly unfair and very costly to require already overburdened
attorneys to respond to arguments that are poorly researched or amount to
vague hand-waving, which is what LabCorp's implied section 101 arguments were
here at the trial level and even to some extent at the Federal Circuit.
LabCorp's failure to properly raise the issue allowed the Federal Circuit to
completely ignore it, so that the Supreme Court was actually analyzing the 101
issue in this case for the first time, without proper fact-finding under
section 101 below: something that it should be extremely loathe to do.

