Robin Hanson has a good argument about the inevitability of Malthusian
economics in our future -- here refined by Anders Sandberg. This Malthusian
future is distant in human terms but an eyeblink in cosmic terms. Sandberg
observes that that our cosmic environment, while very large, is finite and
dispersed. Emigration beyond our solar system can expand these resources only
polynomially, which can't keep up with exponential economic or population
growth. Therefore, our current boom era of exponential economic growth,
wherein manufacturing productivity has grown at about the same positive
percentage rate per year starting in Western Europe in the late Middle Ages,
is historically very unique and must eventually come to an end. Furthermore,
Hanson argues that the specter of Malthus, purged in the late 20th century by
declining fertility, will return -- Darwinian genetic adaptation to modern
fertility-reducing conditions and technologies will eventually bring
population growth rates back to exponentially positive rates until once again
resource limits are reached and most humans (or posthumans) live at
subsistence levels -- very extreme poverty by the standards of modern
developed countries.  
  
The Darwinian argument may be overcome if culture keeps evolving faster than
genes and thereby can keep overcoming future genetic adaptations. (Richard
Dawkins argues that we can overcome our selfish genes). It may be rebutted
that units of culture (what Dawkins calls "memes") themselves are Darwinian
competitors and thus also face Malthusian limits, or that future computerized
minds may reproduce very quickly and evolve as fast as culture. I won't
elaborate on these arguments further here as Robin has got me into a hyper-
futuristic mood and I'd like to suggest another way in which we might achieve
more "room at the bottom".  
  
Hanson counts atoms in order to estimate the density of information (or of
minds) that might be created. But, just as Freeman Dyson, Gerard O'Neill, and
others showed that planets are a waste of mass, so that technologically mature
civilizations won't have planets, I'll argue here that atoms are a waste of
mass-energy, and technologically mature civilizations may not have very many
of them. Instead information may be stored in photons and collections of
electrons and positrons (for example geonium) may handle most information
processing and form the substrate of minds.  
  
Given that a photon can come in a vast number of possibly distinguishable
frequencies, the spectrum spanning more than 20 orders of magnitude, we may be
able to store at least 10^30 bits per photon. One approach to creating photons
is to simply capture the energy of solar nuclear fusions as photons, as we
already know how to do -- this should give us about 10^95 bits worth of
photons of average energy blue. But we'd have to either wait billions of years
for all these fusion reactions to occur naturally in the sun or accelerate
them somehow. More completely, the neutrons and protons in the sun, if
converted into photons of average energy blue, would give us 10^97 bits and we
may not have to wait billions of years if we can figure out how to bring about
this hypothetical conversion. This is a fascinating but very speculative bit
of physics which I will explore further.  
  
Of course, we will still need some electrons or positrons around to actually
process that information and recycle photons. And we still need some neutrons
and protons around to fuse for energy to make up for the waste heat, to the
extent that geonium computations will be less than perfectly reversible.
Unless we are very clever and figure out how to make solid structures that
don't blow up out of electrons and positrons, we will need some magnetic tanks
made out of traditional heavy atoms to hold the geonium. Worse, the strong
tendency for baryon number to be conserved makes cracking protons difficult
and perhaps impossible. Protons are made out of three quarks, and while
cracking quarks is quite possible (particles with two quarks but zero net
baryon number decay spontaneously into particles with no quarks), the tendency
for baryon numbers to be conserved at the energy levels used by current
particle accelerators suggests that cracking the proton, if we can even figure
out how to do it, may require vast amounts of energy, so that only a tiny
fraction of the sun's neutrons and protons might be converted before we run
out of energy from the fusion of the remaining nuclei. Right now we know how
to crack the neutron into a proton and electron, but we don't know how to
crack the proton. To be feasible we will have to discover a way to "catalyze"
proton decay, by analogy to how the activation energies of chemical reactions
can be lowered by catalysts.  
  
If feasible, converting wasteful atoms into more useful photons would give us
many orders of magnitude more room at the bottom. Staving off Malthus then
becomes a question of how much information can be stored in a photon, and of
how quickly electrons or positrons can process those photons.  
  
We still face Heisenberg uncertainty as a limit on how quickly these photonic
memories can be recalled. The product of the measured time of arrival of a
photon and its measured energy (and thus the number of distinguishable
frequencies) has a fixed uncertainty -- if we measure the time with greater
precision, we can distinguish fewer frequencies, and vice versa. This sets a
finite limit on the rate at which we can process the information stored in the
photons. Seth Lloyd has calculated that 1 kilogram of mass converted into
energy can perform at most 10^50 operations per second. So future
civilizations could only stave off Malthus by going photonic -- Malthus will
still eventually catch up, assuming Darwinian competition in reproduction
remains.  
  
In addition to classical bits stored as photon frequencies, an exponentially
higher number of quantum bits (qubits) might be stored in the entangled states
of these photons. However, to use some number of these qubits requires
destroying an exponentially larger amount of them. Thus, against exponential
population growth memory storage itself remains cheap, but recalling memories
or thinking about things becomes exponentially expensive. Qubit minds might
stave off Malthus by hibernating for exponentially longer periods of time,
waking up only to observe an exponentially decreasing number of interesting
events.  
  
My argument that we may figure out how to crack three-quark particles like
neutrons and protons into photons relies on the probability, due to the
imbalance of protons and anti-protons (and neutrons and anti-neutrons) in the
observable universe, that baryon number (a property of quarks) is not
necessarily conserved, and is falsifiable in that sense: if for example we
discover with better telescopes that the amount of antimatter in the universe
is the same as the amount of matter, that will at least strongly suggest that
even at Big Bang energies baryon number is conserved, rendering the
possibility of ever converting the quarks which constitute most of the mass of
neutrons and protons into non-quarkish things (like electrons, positrons or
photons) extremely unlikely. It's also somewhat imminently testable insofar as
if LHC and similar colliders continue to fail to crack the proton, that
further dims prospects. Feasibility, however, is not so testable: one could
argue that, even if baryon number was not conserved in the Big Bang, and even
if we soon discover how to crack the proton in high-energy colliders, we may
never figure out a method, analogous to catalysis in chemical reactions, to
crack protons at economically low energies or to productively recycle the
energies used to perform the conversions rather than it being dispersed as
waste heat.  
  
(h/t: the phrase "Cosmic Malthus" to describe Hanson's theory is from
commenter Norman at Robin's blog).

