Based on yesterday's oral arguments in _LabCorp v. Metabolite_, Harold Wegner
predicts the likelihood that Justice Stevens will write the majority opinion
and that this opinion will reverse and remand the case to the Federal Circuit.
That court had held that the patent claim combining a scientific discovery
with a prior art blood test was patentable.  
  
My observation is that if Stevens,who wrote the old anti-software-patent
opinion in _Parker v. Flook_ , keeps to his old (and the Supreme Court's old)
philosophy regarding subject matter patentability, and extends his comments
beyond "laws of nature" to other expressly forbidden categories (one of which
is "algorithms"), there will be fireworks for business method patents and even
software patents. Even if the Court applies a _Flook_ -type methodology
without expressly excluding algorithms from the scope of its argument, this
could set a very big precedent that could be used to attack software and
business method patents.  
  
I have previously written about the connection between _Metabolite_ 's
controversy over patenting "laws of nature" and the origin of software and
business method patents. In the paper "Elemental Subject Matter" I further
describe how software came to be patentable despite the express prohibition
against patenting "algorithms," and highlight the differences between the
Federal Circuit's software-patent-friendly philosophy and Justice Steven's
software-patent-hostile philosophy -- a difference of philosophy that easily
extends to the "law of nature" at issue in _Metabolite_ , raising the
possibility that _Metabolite_ will set a precedent redounding back onto
software and business method patents.  
  
If _Flook_ is applied in this way to reverse _Metabolite_ , thus creating
uncertainty about the validity of software and business method patents, expect
a hue and cry among corporate lobbyists here on K Street, resulting in
legislation to expressly designate software, business methods, or both as
patentable categories of subject matter.  
  
There are, however, several other possible rationales for invalidating the
patent in _Metabolite_ , so Stevens may have a hard time gathering five votes
to apply the _Flook_ methodology here. Expect the Court's decision in June.

