A recent discussion has inspired me to articulate my own design for better
government, long simmering in the back of my head and in various scribbles. My
focus is on the "action end" of government where disputes are resolved and
laws enforced, namely what in modern democratic systems we call the judicial
and executive branches. Indeed except for the Articles of Incorporation, which
is the constitution of Juristopia, its laws evolve mostly by the common law
method of precedent. Subsidiary organizations are free to pass bylaws if they
wish, as long as they do not contravene Juristopia's own Articles of
Incorporation or disobey an Order of the Extraordinary Court. There is very
narrow legislative role for the Board of Franchisors which will be stated
below. The main democratic element is juries, which play an important role in
limiting the exercise of governmental powers.  
  
To simplify discussions of political power and rebellion, let's posit a system
of magic Rings of Power, a la Tolkien. However, there is no master One Ring.
(Tolkien surely had the correct answer for such a totalitarian power: it must
be destroyed at all costs). Instead these are Rings of Discontempt that
operate as follows:  
  
(1) There are N Rings, where N is odd, say 9. Any Ring in the possession of an
individual who possesses another Ring has no power (that includes the first
Ring possessed -- the second renders the first impotent -- so that there is a
strong disincentive to accumulate Rings).  
  
(2) To operate the ring, a quorum of holders of the Rings, called the Court of
Extraordinary Justices, touch their Rings together and prouounce the unique
name of an individual to be punished for Contempt of Court, and pronounce a
punishment.  
  
(3) The quorum of joined Rings can administer the following magical
punishments to the named person at any range:  
(a) imprisonment in a magical jail for any specified number of time, requiring
the aid of no human jailers  
(b) instant and painless death  
  
(4) The Rings confer on their wearers complete invulnerability to any kind of
violence.  
  
There is no other magic of any sort in Juristopia.  
  
Like the Catholic College of Cardinals, the Extraordinary Justices choose
their own successors. Board of Franchsisor members also choose their own
successors, but have no Rings. Combined with the magical Rings, self-
succession allows the Extraordinary Court to avoid the two main sources of
political bias and pressure from other branches of government they now face:
from their initial appointments by other branches, and by the ultimate ability
of an executive branch to ignore a court order that it despises. An executive
officer who refuses to execute a Court order is punished with Contempt of
Court; the Rings insure that no rebellion against such punishment is possible.  
  
The Articles of Incorporation state that the Court of Extraordinary Justices
exercises only a very narrow jurisdiction, called the Extraordinary
Jurisdiction. All Ordinary Jurisdiction, and all armed forces and police
powers besides the Rings, are auctioned off to the highest bidder as
franchises.  
Franchises are property rights to exercise certain narrowly defined
governmental powers, subject to limitations on the monopolistic fees or taxes
they may charge, determined by juries selected by lottery from the feepayers
or taxpayers.  
  
A number of general kinds of franchises are specified by the Articles: public
nuisance suppression, fraud suppression, armed forces, police forces, and
common law courts are the five main categories of franchises, but there is a
vast variety of possible jurisdictional "boundaries" for franchises within
each category, and ownership of franchises may be bundled within or across
boundaries in a dizzying variety of ways. The franchise market can thus
assemble bundles that best persuade juries of feepayers to maximize fees. Each
franchise collects its own monopoly fees from all persons within its
territory; no franchise may charge fees that are more than what a jury
considers "reasonable", including a reasonable profit. The general franchises
stated in the Articles can be subdivided and narrowed, but not expanded, by
the Board of Franchisors, which can pass bylaws that specify the subject
matter and personal jurisdiction and territorial boundaries of each franchise.
Some franchises are executive (similar to government agencies), and some are
judicial (courts). The Board, like the Court, selects its own successors.  
  
The Articles of Incorporation state that Juristopia Corporation itself does
not have shareholders and may not earn a profit. Its only officers are members
of the Board and Court, and the salaries of these are limited to salaries
deemed "reasonable" by juries chosen by lottery from among Juristopia'
taxpayers, as are its overall budget and the fees (taxes) it may charge within
the territory of Juristopia. Its officers and employees may legally only
engage in the business of Extraordinary Jurisdiction (Court) and writing
initial franchise deeds (Board) -- they are are forbidden from engaging in
ordinary business or Ordinary Jurisdiction.  
  
All Justices and Board members must be eunuchs (if male) or artificially or
naturally postmenstrual and sterile (if female), may own no amount or kind of
property that a jury deems "unreasonable", must dispose of any properties that
will create an imminent conflict of interest, and must recuse themselves from
any legislation or cases that create a conflict of interest. They may not
reproduce themselves in any fashion. The purpose of all this is to minimize
potential biases, conflicts of interests, and motivations to use the Rings to
expand power. (A digital protocol would be ideal if human judgment were not
required to render verdicts and define new franchises).  
  
The Articles state that all the jurisdictions and armed powers shall be
auctioned off to the highest bidder as franchises. There would, for example,
be Army, Navy, and Air Forces franchises empowered to charge a reasonable fee
to the entire island for their services. There would be some public nuisance
suppression franchises: for example there could be an air pollution franchise,
allowing the franchise owner to regulate all pollution in Juristopia, similar
to the U.S. EPA today. These franchises might be further unbundled into the
particulates franchise, the sulfur dioxide franchise, the carbon dioxide
franchise, etc. -- or alternatively the car tailpipe franchise, the electric
plant emissions franchise, etc. These franchises would be allowed to auction
off tradeable emission rights, or altenatively to charge emission fees. To the
extent franchises are monopolies, or coercive, or both, the fees they can
charge are limited to what are "reasonable" fees as determined by juries.  
  
The Articles restrict the Extraordinary Court's jurisdiction to appeals in
certain narrow (extraordinary) areas: choice of law and forum clauses, cases
involving the property rights of franchises, and cases involving violations of
a Bill of Rights, which would also be part of of the Articles. The Bill of
Rights states a number of individual procedural rights, such as right to trial
by juries, the right of juries chosen by a lottery of taxpayers to decide
whether any taxes or franchise fees are reasonable, limits on search, seizure,
and arrest, and so on that must be respected by any entity exercising a
judicial or police power.  
  
All Ordinary Jurisdictions are auctioned off to the highest bidder and can be
freely traded. Among the Articles of Incorporation would be a strong
requirement that Choice of Forum and Choice of Law clauses in contracts be
enforced in a way much broader than current U.S. practice (e.g. allowing all
torts of any kind between the two parties to be included in the scope of
choice, overriding any franchise jurisdictions).  
  
In the expanded form I propose, these will allow pairs of persons (individual
or corporate) to opt out of the franchise that would otherwise have
jurisdiction over future cases between them. This introduces a substantial
degree of competition between franchises, and one might be able to assemble an
AC-style system of insurance/protection companies from such clauses.  
  
Under the Articles there are no Chief Justices, Presidents, or other lead
executive officers that have special constitutional powers. Any Commander-in-
Chief of the Armed Forces is optional and would be chosen by the various armed
frachises themselves, as they may agree. The Court and Board are free to elect
nominal leaders for administrative purposes if they wish.  
  
The biggest open problem in Juristopia is how to stop the Extraordinary Court
from cleverly interpreting the Articles of Incorporation to usurp the Ordinary
Jurisdictions that properly belong to the franchises. Or from just using its
control of the Rings to blatantly violate the Articles and enforce martial law
and slavery for its own grand benefit and everbody else's pauperization, once
enough people have settled on the island with high exit costs. A possible
solution might include giving Extraordinary Juries, selected by lottery for
each decision, their own set of Contempt of Jury Rings to enforce jury
restrictions on the Court and Board.  
javascript:void(0)  
Publish Post  
I have also neglected powers to make and enforce treaties with other
governments. Since such treaties typical assume external sovereignty, the very
low degree of internal sovereignty in Juristopia, which is otherwise a very
good feature, may pose an interesting problem for treaties.  
  
(N.B.: I crudely described a previous version of Juristopia here).  
  
UPDATE: spelling change.

