Why the American design failed? Well, for starters let's get some perspective.
Failed compared to what? The American design failed more slowly and to less an
extent then most of the rest of the world. Only your little trading post
countries, the liberty of which is well explained by their rare economic niche
of attracting global traders, and thus needing to maintain low exit costs,
have managed to beat the U.S. in liberty during the 20th century.  
  
As for the general explanation of why the Constitution couldn't better
constrain the growth of power: high exit costs. Once the American frontier
filled up, and every patch of territory became a sovereign State ruled over by
a vast national government, there was no place for the oppressed left to flee
to. Social networks coalesced, government became less distant, and exit costs
grew. The conditions so favorable to liberty in the American colonies Smith
described so well (you really do need to read Chapter 7 of Smith, who was
there, instead of a narrow ideologue like Rothbard who wasn't) -- cheap land
and distance -- have both largely disappeared. It's no t much of a coincidence
that the Jingo and Reform Burgess complained of sprang up in America during
the same decades that last of the lower 48 were achieving Statehood.  
  
Therer are some secondary explanations too, such as the rising efficiency of
civil bureaucracy due to mass literacy, and the rise of modern corporate
accounting which made the income tax feasible to implement.  
  
At the same time the U.S. imorted ideologies, like Progressivism (which is
basically just a sanitized compromise between communism and the free market),
from places that went down the tubes farther and faster than the U.S., like
Europe. And they went down farther in faster in large part because of their
Justinian Code tradition of totalitarianism, which America has been busy
importing during the 20th century, but at a rate well behind most of the rest
of the world (and we've even managed to export a few counter-memes, like
modern markets, freedom of speech, and republican controls).  
  
I am very glad indeed that we had the U.S. Constitution with its checks and
balances during the 20th century rather than the kind totalitarian system,
derived from the Caeasars and Kaisars and Csars, that led to the vast domestic
oppressions and genocides of fascism and communism. Extremely glad. I cannot
imagine any sane American who lived through the middle of the 20th century who
would now look back and say they would have prefered to live under Hitler or
Mussolini or the many communist regimes. Would you? The U.S. has many choice
targets for your withering critique, and I as well as you would love to make
our politics better, but you should seriously put your critiques and notions
of political failure into some perspective.

