"the only way such a system will grow to the point where there are enough
agents invested in the system to make it self-sustaining is if someone steps
up and provides the bulk resources necessary to make their currency the
standard interchange between untrusted peers."  
  
This is only true if the transaction costs of barter turn out to be too high.
Menger and others (and I, here) have explained why transaction costs of in-
kind transactions are so high offline. This is what makes money so valuable
offline. As I argued in the blog post, this may well not be true for largely
fungible online services like disk space. The transaction costs of barter may
be so low that adding money isn't much of a win. And if the legal system
actually considers the money to be money, it comes with a very costly legal
overhead. See the e-gold problems that Ian Grigg has documented well.  
  
"Alternatives [to a centralized mint] are far too complex for the marginal
benefit they provide..."  
  
Replicating the mint to every node doesn't itself much add to the overall code
complexity. Adding barter note exchange markets, and automating the whole
thing so that the mints and exchanges are largely invisible to the user,
might. But AFAIK nothing like this has ever been tried.  
  
"The smartest thing Bram did when stripping down MojoNation to create
BitTorrent was conforming the digital resource mechanism to the actual
behavior of the users."  
  
This conformation is what a market does quite well when it properly reflects
preferences of users, but doesn't when it doesn't. This brilliance of
BitTorrent conists in creating a very simple but fully automated proxy measure
-- i.e. a crude but effective approximation of of user preferences that
doesn't require specific input from the user. This allowed barter to be fully
automated, even if the efficiency of the resource allocation falls very far
below the theoretical market optimum.  
  
But it may also be brilliant to add to the under-the-covers complexity in
order to increase the efficiency and flexibility of the overall system -- to
make it more like a market.

