Every year millions of people spend days or weeks on cruises, but Patri
Friedman, Wayne Gramlich, and their fellow Seasteaders want to live on the sea
full time. They want, essentially, to conduct political experiments in mobile
communities as free as possible from sovereign jurisdictions. To do this, they
are designing extravagant new kinds of structures that they believe will
withstand the violent storms and other harsh conditions that can occur
offshore.  
  
Besides tourism and jurisdictional arbitrage, there are a variety of other
economic incentives to live on the ocean. Fishing and fish processing often
involve employees spending many months at sea. Oil, diamonds, and soon a wide
variety of other kinds of minerals are increasingly being extracted as land-
based minerals are slowly depleted.  
  
Gramlich and Friedman have a very admirable goal but are trying to do too many
things in parallel. They seem to have spent far more time in creating
futuristic designs from scratch than in figuring out how to retrofit normal
ships or mobile offshore oil platforms. On top of this is their important but
novel and ambitious political experiment in lowering exit costs. While there
are some relationships between the politics and the engineering, a better
approach is to innovate in one area at a time. Design novel offshore
technology, or design novel offshore communities, but don't try to do too much
of both at once.  
  
Friedman voices a complaint, hardly uncommon in the world of engineering, that
he has a hard time communicating with ocean engineers. I suspect the problem
is that Friedman and Gramlich have taken their designs, whether workable or
not, far away from the kinds of designs ocean engineers are used to analyzing.
If they just started with normal ships and offshore platforms, then used such
equipment as building blocks for larger structures, rather than trying to
reinvent ocean engineering from scratch, they would not lack for experienced
engineers to understand their designs and shops to assemble them.  
  
Sure, such structures seem crude and inefficient compared with the elegant and
optimal structures that might be designed in theory. But they would be a far
less expensive way to demonstrate the political and economic viability of
seasteading. And they could be shown to offshore engineers who could quickly
recognize most major problems they might have. The Friedman/Gramlich approach
excites the imagination, but a far more incremental approach is needed to make
it work. To take up Friedman's analogy: if all that exists are military
planes, and you want to start the first civilian airline, don't try designing
civilian planes and civilian airports from scratch. Just buy a bomber, yank
out the bomb bays and guns, install passenger seats, get permission to use a
couple military airports, take a few test flights, and start selling tickets.
The first version may well fall very short of the optimal or ideal you have in
mind, but it will give you the experience and the revenue needed to improve
the design and approach that optimal.  
  
The biggest technological hurdle to meeting the requirements of the political
experiment is probably the ability to join and separate the floating platforms
at low cost. They must be moored and yet withstand the harshest storms (or
alternatively to anticipate the storm, quickly unmoor, ride out the storm
separately, and remoor when normalcy returns). This problem is mentioned
briefly here but as far as I know, Seasteaders have not come up with a good
solution for it.  
  
Mooring in rough water is a hard problem -- there are good reasons docks lie
in sheltered bays. Ship-to-ship refueling, a common naval procedure, has long
been very dangerous in bad weather. Ships and platforms loosely moored with
cables can easily collide, smashed together by wind and wave, with devastating
consequences. Friedman and Gramlich believe that their ideal platform will
have "no" bobbing, lateral movement, or tilting from waves and wind. But oil
platforms do exhibit enough such movements that trying to keep them moored
together with traditional techniques in a storm would be highly dangerous.
Cables could not prevent the platforms from colliding with high force, whereas
a completely rigid mooring that coupled the movements of all the joined
platforms would likely fail from strain.  
  
Some good old Internet searching digs up the fact that folks in the deep sea
oil and liquified natural gas (LNG) industries have solved a similar problem
-- how to offload fluids offshore, from FPSOs to tankers or from tankers to
offshore pipeline terminals. For example the LNG industry needs to be able to
hook up the huge LNG tankers to the offshore offloading terminals even in
storms. One solution to this is the soft yoke flexible mooring. This is often
abbreviated "SYMO" for "soft yoke mooring and offloading". It allows ships to
moor to each other without the dangers of approaching and colliding in rough
wind and water.  
  
 _A soft yoke flexible mooring (SYMO) for yoking ships together, even in rough
waves and most storms. The design allows each ship to ride the waves
separately, greatly reducing the strain on the yoke, while keeping them from
approaching or dispersing._  
  
Here's how I might do an experiment in offshore political mobility using off-
the-shelf equipment or minor variations on same (this "mixed" version, as the
Seasteaders would call it, is not terribly original to me, except for
including a workable mooring technology):  
  
(1) Get a few dozen yacht owners to participate as volunteers. ("Yacht" here
just refers to any seaworthy boat capable of mooring to other such craft and
to larger platforms with SYMOs).  
  
(2) Set up a system of two or more privately owned offshore anchored moorings:
tough cable moorings such as those used by large ships in the oil industry (eg
FPSOs).  
  
(3) Attach a small old cruise ship or retrofitted oil platform to each
anchored mooring. These should be large enough to have most of the
infrastructure a small cruise ship would have, and be able to provide basic
services to the yachts.  
  
(4) Yachts moor to the larger ship or platform using SYMOs. For oil platforms
the SYMOs may have to be heavily modified. Yachts might also moor to each
other using SYMOs, but some of the yachts should also be anchor-moored to the
ocean floor, unless they don't mind the community drifting.  
  
(5) Yacht owners choose which of the two or more communities they will join.  
  
(6) The cruise ships or platforms that form the core of these communities
compete to provide various services, amenities, and political systems.  
  
(7) Yacht owners can either be independently wealthy, or they can make a
living by providing services to nearby fishing fleets, fish processors,
offshore oil platforms, etc., or by providing temporary quarters for workers
of same.  
  
(8) When a storm comes that may be too much for the small SYMOs to withstand,
everybody gets on yachts and disperses until the storm blows over.  
  
These communities would look a bit like this offshore floating dock in a
sheltered bay near Lund, British Columbia -- but much farther offshore,
larger, more robust, and more politically independent.  
  
 _If you see this coming, scram._  
  
There will be big differences between these salty communities and modern
towns. If the local court or zoning board or captain-of-captains won't approve
improvements to your yacht, or your desire to set up a gambling house or a
stinky fish processing plant, just move your house to another seastead
community that will tolerate it. (I suspect fish processors will retain their
own separate communities). Low exit costs bring freedom.  
  
One kind of public nuisance that these seasteads may be in special danger of
running into is what I call a _provocative externality_ , meaning that besides
or instead of being ethically dubious or causing direct harm to the community,
they may cause danger to fellow community members by provoking a country to
attack the seastead: drug smuggling, money laundering, polygamy, being a haven
for terrorists, and so on are examples of activities that could, whether
rightly or wrongly, provoke attack. Since many of these activities might also
be quite lucrative, the political issues of whether to ban them may cause
great tensions. Vulnerability to attack by traditional countries limits the
degree of substantive liberty seasteads can achieve -- they will not be able
to achieve a perfectly voluntary society within even the substantive law, much
less within procedural law, which I now turn to.  
  
The political and legal designs for Seasteads need even more work than the
engineering designs. It is not enough to just say that all law be based on
contract and thus all will be fine. One must rather tackle crucial issues such
as legal procedure. As I have written elsewhere, in response to a claim that
Seastead government will not be based on coercion:  

> No coercion? In these Seasteads, who does the law enforcement, and who or
what gives them the right to commit law enforcement acts that are physically
equivalent to torts and crimes? What distinguishes arrest from assault and
battery, imprisonment from kidnapping, legal distraint of goods from theft, or
a legal search from trespass? I think you will find that these societies will
have to deal with the very same problems of coercion and procedure as our own
governments. Calling a legal document that defines and allocates rights to
commit these coercive acts a "contract" instead of a "constitution" may be the
Rothbard-correct way to do things, but it doesn't actually go very far towards
solving the hard problems of living together in a world where people are often
coercive.

It is even more important for the political and legal designs than it is for
the engineering designs to take an off-the-shelf approach. Pick a country and
subdivisions thereof, either a current or a well-document historical politican
and legal system (for example the U.S. and a particular state, county, and
town), and use its constitution, statutes, and court precedents as basic legal
precedents, which can then be modified by local courts (in a common-law
manner) and other local political authorities. If the U.S. is used as a model,
I have suggested some basic changes to make its constitution less subject to
the growth of government power. Low exit costs will also greatly help. These
kinds of macro-political issues will mostly, however, be well beyond the scope
of Seasteading unless or until they reach a time when they are large and
mature mobile cities. The first ones will, as with cruise ships today,
probably just be based on the "captain is king" model that has long dominated
sea law. Friedman has even taken to calling himself "Captain Patri". Perhaps
seasteads will revive the old paradigm of political property rights. I wish
these projects the best of luck.

