Robin Hanson asks, "what key features make this [human] growth groove
possible?" -- two key events being the birth of agriculture and the industrial
revolution. Commenter "gwern" is on the money in saying that (a) explaining
why the IR happened when and where it did is hard, and (b) the explanation has
to include something that China didn't have much sooner, which eliminates most
of the usual explanations. I'd add that explaning the birth of agriculture is
even harder -- we have vast amounts of historical data on the IR and only
archaeological and comparative anthropological evidence about the birth of
agriculture.  
  
Indeed, the most important thing in explaing these two events is to be aware
of enough facts from different fields, and have sufficient doses of skepticism
and common sense, that you can eliminate the many theories that are popular
but obviously, if you know enough such things, wrong. For example, be aware
that hunter-gatherers were experts on botany and animal behavior. It's not
plausible that the simple ideas that seeds can grow into plants that you can
eat later, or that you can keep an animal tied or penned up and eat it later,
were not discovered and known countless times during the c. 100,000 years
between when our brains became modern-sized and agriculture developed. There
has to have been some major barrier to benefitting from such obvious ideas to
have kept agriculture from developing far sooner. I also don't find genetics
plausible as a cause of agriculture, since agriculture ended up spreading to a
number of human groups that had become genetically isolated long before the
dawn of agriculture. (Genetic evolution caused _by_ agriculture is another
story -- Cochran and Harpending have some ideas very much worth thinking
about). Also not plausible are climate explanations -- there were many local
climates hospitable to agriculture throughout those 100,000 years -- just not
necessarily at Mediterranean or higher lattitudes.  
  
That said, going back to the IR there a number of likely-to-firm differences
between China and Western Europe (or Great Britain in particular):  
  
(1) Differences in political and legal culture. What differences,
specifically, it's hard to say, because there is very little about, for
example, Sung or Ming dynasty commercial law that has been translated into
English: far too little to compare to English law in the 18th century, for
example. We know some very general things, such as that Western Europe was
(and still is) a far more legalistic culture than China. Also, we know that
Western Europe (contrary to Gregory Clark's claim) radically changed its
property law between the 16th and 19th centuries, from a feudal model of of
hierarchy of tenures and bundled political property rights to a model based on
old Roman law with flattened and purely economic ownership. There ensued
movements such as the enclosure movement in England and an accompanying large
increase in capital investments in land. But we don't know when or to what
extent similar incentives to capital investment might have been present or
missing in China.  
  
(2) China never controlled the world's oceans and merchant marine, but the
British just prior and during its IR did. If this explains the IR, then to
explain our explanation (i.e. why did Britain come to control the world's
ocean-going trade) we have to step back and solve the even more puzzling
question of how a tiny country of fishing-folk and small-time crusaders,
Portugal, and not an advanced superpower like China, was the first country to
take over most of the world's oceanic trade routes (later to be beaten back by
other Western European countries and eventually Great Britain).  
  
(3) China had the printing press, but in contrast to Western Europe it did not
lead to a rapid growth in literacy sustained over several centuries -- perhaps
because of bureaucratic central control rather than the free-enterprise
printing businesses that sprung up all over Western Europe, perhaps because
the much greater number of symbols did not as efficiently lend itself to
printing as the Roman alphabet, or a combination of these two factors.  
  
(The Romans were not all good -- indeed they gave our culture something quite
nasty which I will blog on in the near future).  
  
Other interesting related phenomenon to explain, (and it would be nice per
Occam's Razor if it was the same general explanation, but social life is
rarely that simple) is why Japan industrialized well in advance of China and
Britain was a few decades ahead of the rest of Western Europe during most of
the 18th and the first half of the 19th century.  
  
Robin: "If you wanted to attribute the industrial revolution to writing, you'd
have to explain why there was a strong threshold effect, so that pre-1800
writing levels had weak growth rate effects, while post-1800 writing levels
had strong effects."  
  
Besides threshold effects, there could be delay effects: for example, the the
rapid growth of books and literacy after the mid-15th century in Western
Europe gave rise to a slow but accelerating series of innovations (most
obviously scientific and technological advances, but perhaps also innovations
in business or law), which in turn gave rise to the IR.

