 _Genovese coat of arms with gryphons and cross of St. George._  
  
Genoa was the most commercially innovative city of premodern times. Insurance,
the joint-stock corporation, close cooperation between navy and merchant
marine, international trade and exploration, and banking all made substantial
progress in Genoa. The basic drivers of these innovations were Genoa's
merchant culture and its unprecedented commitment to freedom of contract.  
  
 _La Lanterna, the harbor lighthouse. 40 meters of rock and 77 meters of tower
put the lantern 117 meters above sea level at the harbor mouth. The current
version dates from the 16th century, but a lighthouse tower has been at the
location from at least the 12th century._  
  
Genoa was probably a significant port under the Greeks, Etruscans, and then
the Romans, but is not recorded as playing a major role in history during
those periods. It declined in the Dark Ages but revived by the 11th century
and was one of the first Italian towns to assert its independence. It played
an important role in transporting and protecting crusader fleets and those of
the merchants and colonists who followed. During the Crusades it gained
footholds on the strategic bottlenecks of the Dardanelles and of the Bosporus
across from Constantinople, giving it access to the Black Sea and the Silk
Road to China.  
  
The Genovese were the chief commercial innovators of the later Middle Ages,
and if anything was key to their innovations it was their advanced contract
law and their commitment to freedom of contract. Nothing showed this
commitment more than its long struggle against Church doctrine banning usury,
which at the time meant any charging of interest. Genovese contracts "hid"
interest charges as profits (which were acceptable) or in exchange rates.  
  
 _The Galata Tower, built by the Genovese on the Bosporus across from
Constantinople during the crusades. Their shared control over the Bosporus
opened up the lucrative Oriental trade and allowed them to plant colonies
along the Black Sea._  
  
An example of the use of exchange rates to incorporate interest was the "dry
loan" which structured interest as a transport charge commonly used in a "wet
loan" which were normally paid off in a distant city as a way of transmitting
money. Church leaders recognized many of these ruses and complained, but since
Genovese municipal judges were, like the rest of the Genovese community,
staunch advocates of freedom of contract, and since the Church was dependent
on Genovese power (for example to transport and protect crusaders and pilgrims
on the seas), the judges winked at these ruses and the Church mostly did not
crack down on the practice. In the process of developing these ruses the
Genovese became creative drafters of commercial contracts and learned to
distinguish elements such as risk, loan, and investment that had been bundled
together and treated as inseparable in previous eras.  
  
Perhaps the chief Genovese innovation was modern insurance unbundled from
credit or investment:  
  

> In short succession Genoa developed insurance, insurance pools secured by
landed estates, and reinsurance. Exchanges sprang up for trading public debt,
commodity futures, and other commercial paper. Bankruptcy law and the
settlement of international trade disputes reached new levels of
sophistication. Accounting became widespread and double-entry bookkeeping was
born. As a result of their cumulative breakthroughs in institutions and
technology, Europeans became the first merchants to travel and trade around
the entire globe.

Medieval Genovese merchants, like their Venetian rivals, traveled from Iceland
to China. Later Genovese such as Christopher Columbus would lead exploration
of the New World.  
  
Insurance developed out of an ancient form of marine finance, a loan that only
had to be paid back if the ship returned safely:  
  

> The earliest risk-pooling insurance contracts were structured similarly to,
and enforced under the same legal principals as, loans. Indeed they bundled a
loan from the combined investor/insurer with an insurance clause -- in the
event that the ship was wrecked, the loan need not be paid back. In 14th
century Genoa, we see the separation of the investor from the insurer, via a
contract with its conditional clause but requiring no initial loan. Investment
contracts became separate entities and could be contracted with different
parties, greatly improving the spreading of risk for these ventures. Such
improved risk management was crucial for the explosion of overseas trade that
Europe initiated over the succeeding centuries.

One of the most innovative families were the Vivaldis. Frederico Vivaldi was
the one of the first merchants to be insured in the new way, and we still have
some of his insurance contracts. His ancestors Vandino and Ugolino Vivaldi
were famous merchants and explorers of the west coast of Africa, pioneering
new discoveries and a lucrative trade that would be exploited much more by the
Portuguese starting in the 15th century, taking advantage of its naval control
over the Straights of Gibraltar (which Genoa never clearly gained, since
before the Portuguese conquest of Ceuta Muslims controlled both shores). Today
the University of Genoa sits on the Via Vivaldi, named after this most
adventurous of families.  
  
 _The Genoan topographyhelped it protect warehouses full of goods, Genoa's
main source of wealth, as well as its populace._  
  
Another famous Genovese family was the D'orias. Tedesio D'Oria funded the
Vivaldi brothers in their last voyage, an ill-fated attempt at the end of the
13th century to pioneer a route to India -- a feat not accomplished until
about two hundred years later by the Portuguese. In the attempt they may have
(re)discovered the Canary Islands, which in any case the Genovese would
colonize by the middle of the 14th century. Andrea Doria was the most famous
Genovese admiral, responsible for defeating the Turks in the naval battle of
Lepanto, among other feats.  
  
Genoa was also the birthplace of corporations traded by shares, the prototype
for the later English joint-stock corporation. Like many of the early English
joint-stock companies, most of the Genovese companies were colonial companies
that derived their revenue from tribute, tax, and trade from the many colonies
they established:  
  

> The medieval organizations that most resembled later joint-stock
corporations were the Genovese _maone_. These bore some strong resemblances to
the _publicani_ tax farming corporations of the Roman Republican era, although
it is not clear how they could have survived the intervening Late Empire and
Dark Ages other than as very obscure (and perhaps now lost) written
descriptions. In form and function _maone_ also bore strong resemblances to
some early joint-stock companies such as the Bank of Amsterdam, Bank of
England, and the Dutch and English East India Companies.  
>  
>  _Palazzo San Giorgio (St. George). The Bank of San Giorgio (est. 1407) came
to handle most of the municipal debt, providing a prototype for later central
banks such as the Bank of Amsterdam and the Bank of England._  
>  
>  The Italian cities often sold off their tax receivables to wealthy
merchants at a discount as a way to borrow funds. (Discounting was one of the
many ways late medieval financiers avoided the rather lax and formalistic
usury restrictions that remained in Genoa). The debts were divided into equal
shares called _loca_ or _partes_. Legally, these debt shares were personal
property (chattels) and could be freely traded.  
>  
>  Technically, no organization was created when the city sold its tax
receivables to merchants. However, to effectively collect the taxes, the
holders of _loca_ formed an organization called a _maona_ or _societas
comperarum_. This organization would then subcontract to tax farmers to
collect the taxes. By the fourteenth century, Genovese _maone_ also engaged in
military conquest and colonization. These were, quite literally, corporate
raiders.  
>  
>  _Il borsa (the Exchange). Genoa pioneered in issuing and trading shares of
ships and of municipal and corporate debt._  
>  
>  Normally, _maone_ were temporary, but some of them ended up lasting for a
long time. In 1346 the _Maona di Chio e di Focea_ (a company for managing the
taxes of Chios and Focea) was formed. This organization's members obtained
from Genoa the exclusive right to collect taxes from Chios (an Aegean island)
and Phocaea (a port on the Anatolian coast). But first the company would have
to conquer them! Although technically a temporary organization, it lasted
until 1566.  
>  
>  Rather than going to buy receivables from Genoa, subscriptions to the _di
Chio e di Focea's_ _loca_ shares (still legally debt, but to be paid out in
dividends as taxes and trading revenues were collected) went to fund 29
galleys to conquer Chios and Phocaea. The Genovese Republic, for a fee,
granted the organization exclusive rights to collect taxes from the conquered
territories as well as special trading privileges. The conquests, taxes, and
trading were at least partially successful, and by the 16th century more than
600 persons owned _loca_ of this _maona_. This function and some of this
structure would later be emulated by the Dutch and English India Companies,
but with a basic legal difference -- "shares" in these later joint-stock
companies would constitute ownership (like ship shares) not debt as with the
_maona_.

Genoa was limited in its naval endeavors because Muslims, and then by the end
of the 15th century the Portuguese and Spanish, controlled the Straights of
Gibraltar. The Genovese nevertheless supplied several leading navigators of
the great Age of Exploration, including Nicoloso da Recco, Lanzarotto
Malecello, Antoniotto Uso di Mare, Christopher Colombus and probably the
Cabots. Its merchants also played a leading role in investing in Spanish and
later English endeavors. But with the Reformation the center of commercial
innovation would move from Italy to the Netherlands and England. Those
innovators stood on the shoulders of giants, and the biggest such giant had
been Genoa.  
  
 _Flag with traditional English symbols: gryphons and cross of St. George.
More importantly, England borrowed and improved upon many Genovese commercial
innovations, ushering in the modern era of global trade and the industrial
revolution._  
  
England was strongly allied with Genoa throughout much of the Middle Ages. It
is thought by some that English symbols such as the Cross of St. George and
the gryphon derive from this alliance. English ships flying the Cross of St.
George in the Mediterranean were protected by Genovese fleets. More
importantly, England derived many of the institutions most critical to the
development of overseas trade and colonies and domestic industry from Genoa.
England, like the Genovese and Portugal (and unlike many other powers of the
time such as China) put their navy primarily on the task of protecting its
merchant marine. Its joint stock corporations, many of them colonial, derived
from the Genovese colonial companies with their interests divided into shares.
Lloyd's of London, with "Names" putting up their estates as collateral for
reinsurance, still has the same basic structure as the marine insurance pools
pioneered in the 14th century by the Genovese.

