In the early 15th century, two nations at opposite ends of the world -- one
vast and the other tiny, one an ancient and advanced civilization and the
other recently emerged from a barbaric Dark Ages, one fielding large fleets
with large ships, the other fielding small fleets with small ships -- both set
out on the sea. Told that one of these nations was destined to travel around
Africa and conquer the main sea trade routes of the world by the early part of
the 16th century, any rational observer would conclude that this prophecy must
refer to the vast and ancient civilization with its giant fleets. That
observer would have been wrong. But why?  
  
The vast nation, the Chinese Empire, sent abroad vast naval flotillas -- the
Zheng He fleets. The main purpose of these fleets was not to develop trade,
nor to protect trade, nor even to conquer. Instead, the main purpose was
simply to display the glory of the Chinese Empire, which as everyone already
knew was indeed the most glorious and powerful empire on the planet. A quite
secondary purpose was to collect tribute, which came nowhere near the levels
needed to fund the fleets.  
  
 _Size of a Zheng He "treasure ship" vs. a typical Portuguese or Spanish
caravel (here Columbus'_ Santa Maria _)._  

These state fleets operated completely independently of the vibrant private
Chinese merchant fleets that traded not only off China with Japan and Korea
and the Philippines, but in Indonesia, Indochina, India, and as far as the
east coast of Africa. Zheng He did not help to either protect, expand, or
otherwise enable this trade. Instead Zheng He, a eunuch and master bureaucrat
of the Emperor, sailed his vast fleet as far as Africa accomplishing little
more than showing off the glory of the Emperor and collecting exotic animals
for his amusement.  
  
All it took was a political change for the bureaucracy to realize that these
expeditions were far too expensive and ultimately pointless. But, as often
occurs with politics, the Emperor overreacted and banned not only Zheng He's
"treasure fleets," but also the productive trade of the Chinese merchants. The
last "treasure fleet" returned in 1433 and China soon withdrew on itself.  
  
 _A million-yuan giraffe, brought back to China from East Africa by a Zheng He
flotilla in 1414 (click to enlarge). Not the most cost-efficient zoo
acquisition, but the Emperor's ships were bigger and grander than anybody
else's! In the same year, on the other side of the planet, the Portuguese
using a far humbler but more practical fleet took the strategic choke-point of
Ceuta from the Muslims._  
  
Meanwhile, on the other side of the globe, a tiny nation of fishing villages
and small-time crusaders set out on a different path. Assisted by navigators
and investors from other parts of Europe, the Portuguese embarked on a pay-as-
you go path of conquest and trade. They focused on conquering strategic points
that allowed them to control, tax, protect, and enable trade. They enforced
the property rights of their allied merchants and otherwise enabled the
commercial institutions by which that trade could flourish.

The first little conquest was Ceuta, on the African side of the Straights of
Gibraltar, the strategic choke point of the Atlantic-Mediterranean shipping
routes. In 1414, at the height of the Zheng He expeditions, Prince Henry ("the
Navigator") of Portugal conquered Muslim Ceuta for the Christians. Having
gained this crucial strategic advantage over their Muslim and Genoan rivals,
Portugal went on to conquer and settle several Atlantic island chains that had
been discovered by the Genoans, including the Canaries and the Azores. The
Portuguese also followed the older Genoese missions down the west coast of
Africa.  
  
At each step down Africa, the Portuguese set up trading stations. They traded
European goods ranging from weapons to Venetian glass beads (used by many
Africans as money and jewelry) for gold, slaves, and a variety of exotic
products. At the same time the Chinese Empire was persecuting its merchants,
banning them from trading overseas, the Portuguese were slowly expanding their
trading posts down the coast of Africa, paying for their explorations as they
went by setting up new and lucrative businesses.  
  
Each expedition pushing farther south was a humble affair involving tiny
numbers of small ships. Soon after the middle of the century, the Portuguese
learned by repeated experience how to navigate out of sight of the (northern)
Pole Star. Using this knowledge they made their way down the west coast of
Africa in the southern hemisphere. Then they did what no Arab, Chinese, or
Indian navigator had apparently done from the other direction. In 1488
Bartolemeu Dias' tiny fleet of caravels sailed around the southern cape of
Africa and into the Indian Ocean. Four years later Portugal's neighbor Spain
sent the Genoese navigator Christopher Columbus to Asia from the other
direction, but Asia turned out to be much farther west than Columbus predicted
and America sat in between.  
  
  
 _Extent of the Portuguese maritime empire by the mid 16th century (click to
enlarge). Controlled territory in green; forts and trading colonies in red. By
stark contrast, China with its vast wealth, advanced civilization, and giant
fleets failed to sail around Africa to set up trading posts on the west coast
of Africa or Europe._  
  
Using its now mature experience in open-seas navigation and advanced European
technologies such as the cannon, as well as its good sense of affordable yet
effective fighting and trading ships, subsequent Portuguese naval fleets soon
conquered the main strategic choke points of Middle Eastern and Asian trade:
Hormuz, Malacca, and others. Rather than ignoring merchants, they focused on
controlling and enabling trade. They weren't out to show off the glory of
Portugal; instead they created it. They invited investors from many other
parts of Europe to send trading fleets. Trading between different Asian ports
and trading European silver for exotic Asian goods both proved quite
lucrative. By the early 16th century, the Portuguese had revolutionized
navigation and had conquered the main trade routes of the world. Instead of
Chinese fleets conquering Ceuta and Gibraltar and setting up trading posts in
London and Lisbon, it was Portuguese fleets that set up trading colonies in
India, Indonesia, Japan, and China. Soon other small European nations were to
follow.  
  
When it comes to the "final frontier" of space, it seems to be so far the West
that has stepped into China's old shoes. What did Apollo return but glory and
a handful of rocks? We proved that our socialists, if funded by taxing
capitalists, could beat their socialists funded by socialists. Did such proof
of bureaucratic glory really require 1% of our GDP over several years?  
  
Apollo has been followed by several more white elephants that have much more
to do with showing off the power and glory of federal bureaucrats than with
military advantage or practical business. The space shuttle was originally
promised to cost $36 million per flight (in today's dollars). It was supposed
to greatly reduce the cost to space and thereby give rise to "space-based
civilization." NASA predicted that we would have bases on Mars by the year
2000, and a generation of boys dreamed of growing up to be astronauts who
traveled across the solar system.  
  

 __

 _A billion-dollar rock made of anorthosite, a very common mineral on earth as
well as on the moon. But we got there first, and our rocket was bigger than
theirs!_

In fact the Shuttle ended up costing $1.5 billion per flight, over forty (40)
times the promised price even when adjusted for inflation . The space station
announced in the early 1980s and promised to be completed within a decade. But
the first module was not launched (to be assembled into the greatly designed-
down form of the International Space Station) until 1998. And just NASA's
portion of the cost has exceeded its estimated cost for the entire program
when it was first announced.

Past and current proposals for Moon and Mars bases are also nothing more than
the same kind of dramatic white elephants: they have no realistic prospects of
military advantage or practical business. NASA is still stuck on Werner Von
Braun's sixty-year-old science fiction scenario of "space stations" and
"bases" that have almost no practical use beyond showing off the power of
federal bureaucrats to spend vast sums of money in dramatic ways.  
  
There is a thread of space development that more closely resembles the pay-
you-go methods of Portugal and other successful explorers and developers of
frontiers. These involve launching useful satellites into orbit for
communications and surveillance. As with the Portuguese, these serve both
military and commercial purposes. They are not just for show. Spinoffs of
these spacecraft form the flotilla of small unmanned spacecraft we have sent
to by now explore all the planets of the solar system, as well as several
comets and asteroids. The succesful Hubble telescope is a spinoff of the U.S.
National Reconaissance Office's spy satellites. And environmental satellites
have revolutionized weather prediction and climate study on our home planet.
Recently, space tourism with suborbital rockets has demonstrated a potential
to develop a new thread of pay-as-you-go space development largely unrelated
to the prior gargantuan manned spaceflight efforts.  
  
The Zheng He and NASA style of frontier-as-PR, where the emphasis is on
showing the glory of the government, is a recipe for failure in the
exploration and development of new frontiers. It is in sharp contrast to the
pay-as-you go method by which tiny Portugal conquered the world's oceans,
exemplified today by the practical unmanned satellites of the commercial and
military efforts. It is by these practical efforts, that fund themselves by
commercial revenue or practical military or environmental benefit, and not by
glorious bureaucratic white elephants, that the successful pioneers will, in
good time, explore and develop the solar system.

