libra: _People used to believe that investing in stocks and real estate
provided good hedges against inflation. But the trouble is, those sectors can
get overproduced, and prices eventually fall to marginal cost of production.
Thus investors now are reallocating towards commodities, because those do not
get overproduced._  
  
I agree that to some extent this is probably true. This is reinforced by the
fact that commodities are a smaller market than real estate or stocks, so only
a relatively small move out of them is needed to produce a relatively big run
up in commodities. A caveat is that (speaking very generally) minerals will
also be overproduced if their prices exceed the net present value of the
mineral in the ground given inflation expectations (see my charts in my
subsequent blog post).  
  
 _So it's not that inflation is any different than five or fifteen years ago.
It's just that now people are investing in commodities as inflation hedges,
rather than stocks and real estate._  
  
If you mean that rational inflation _expectations_ are no higher, because
stocks and real estate are down, then commodity prices exceed their net
present value given inflation expectations and we are in a commodities bubble.
The fact that minerals production has not substantially increased in response
to higher prices tells me that it's not a bubble, i.e. that the the prices
reflect rationally higher inflation expectations. These inflation expectations
can be rationally explained by the extreme potentials now possible in federal
finance that I've outlined above.  
  
But in the U.S. at least real estate is not down at least nominally over its
prices 3 years ago and longer, it is primarily down compared a year ago. The
real estate market had been pumped full of moral hazard that it is now
disgorging before it will go back to being as reliable an inflation hedge as
it once was.  
  
As for stocks, I've never thought they were a good inflation hedge. Price
stickiness means they can only raise their prices far more slowly than the
costs of their inputs, especially mineral inputs, so inflation (or even just
higher inflation expectations which drive up commodity prices first) gobbles
up profit margins. In the 1970s, U.S. stocks lost nearly 90% of their real
value, as much as in the Great Depression, but unlike the Great Depression
they broke even in nominal value. Inflation can destroy real stock values just
as much as deflation.

