Douglass North and Niall Ferguson, among other historians, have observed the
dramatic lowering of English government bond rates after the Glorious
Revolution in 1688 (alternatively seen as a Dutch invasion aided and abetted
by Parliamentary and City of London traitors to the House of Stuart, and a
subsequent "political merger" of the former enemy nations, as Ferguson puts
it). North and Ferguson have imputed these lower rates to the superiority of
modern democracy which they see as having been given birth by that Revolution.  
  
Aside from the very uncommon but verbose Jacobite, and aside from that sad
majority of historians who are shallow parrots of yesterday's tabloid
headlines and fail to see the importance of anything so abstract as government
bond rates, there is general agreement by the remaining historians about the
effect of the Revolution on the great lowering of England's bond rates. But,
while the identification of the Glorious Revolution as a great improvement in
the financial condition of the English government (and subsequent world
dominance of the British Empire, spread of free trade, abolition of slavery,
etc. -- as well as to modern evils such as historically unprecedented rates of
deficit spending, taxation, and inflation) is accurate, the attribution by
North and Ferguson of these lower rates to the supposed "democratic" nature of
the Revolution is quite wrong.  
  
A more accurate if rather vague view of the situation is given by Nicholas
Gruen:  
  

> Be that as it may, one of the huge things that powered us into the modern
world was the idea of subjecting monarchs to the rule of law - particularly in
Holland and the UK (after the Glorious Revolution of 1688). Because debtors
for the first time had an expectation of being repaid when the monarch
borrowed money off them, bond rates went right down and the government could
borrow money. ‘A free nation deep in debt’ I think was the contemporary
expression as Britain and Holland’s stars rose.

We can be far more specific about how the Dutch Invasion of 1688 caused
England's bond rates to decrease. There are rather three specific events,
quite related to the rule of law but not at all related to voting of the
masses (which was not a feature of England for more than a century following
that Revolution), but far more pertinent to the English government's
immediately subsequent ability to finance itself at low rates. The first was
the Bank of England. Whatever the advantages or faults of central banking to
the general economy, the Bank of England was the financial engine behind the
Royal Navy's subsequent boast, factual until the 20th century, that "Britania
Rules the Waves", and specifically its ability to enforce free trade and
destroy slavery. The two other events are quite related. The second event was
a now-obscure lawsuit against King William and Queen Mary resulting in a
crucial legal opinion written by one of England's greatest Chief Justices,
Lord Holt, in 1701. The third was a now-obscure provision of the 1701 Act of
Settlement which reasserted the independence of Holt and the other English
justices from both Crown and Parliament. The Bank of England is well known,
but these latter two events are at least as important and deserve to be yanked
from their obscurity and put into every History 101 lesson.  
  
Justice Iredell gives a good description of _The Banker's Case_ in the later
U.S. case Chisholm v. Georgia. Briefly, in the case brought by banker
creditors of the Crown in 1701 to collect in what was owed them under debts
contracted by the Stuart kings, the House of Lords (the ultimate court of
appeal), led by Lord Chief Justice Holt, held that that the Court of the
Exchequer had the power to decide and remedy a case of debt brought against
the Crown, and that their decision holding the debts valid and remedying them
with payment from the Exchequer was proper. In this particular case, William
had no power to renege, not only on debts incurred under his reign, but on the
debts incurred by his Stuart predecessors Charles II and James II.  
  
This would not have meant too much of the Crown had retained a unilateral
ability to fire the justices of the Court of the Exchequer for deciding
against the Crown. In the Act of Settlement Parliament determined that the
Crown's justices held their posts for life "on good behavior": it would take a
vote of the House of Commons, the House of Lords, _and_ the concurrence of the
Crown itself to impeach a justice.  
  
The combination of _The Banker's Case_ and judicial tenure for life created
what economists call a credible commitment for the government to abide by its
contracts. This is a comitment that neither a single person as sovereign
operating under Ulpian's principle of Roman law that "the prince's will is
law", nor a democratic legisulature acting under Rosseau's principle that "the
general will" supposedly reflected in the enactments of this legislature are
unreviewable law, can make. Such a sovereign can simply declare it to be the
law that they need not abide by their contracts or by the property rights of
their subjects. It is the separation of powers -- and especially an judiciary
with power of final decision over contracts involving the government treasury
that is as independent as possible of those tax collectors, borrowers, and
repayers -- not democratic voting that makes the credible commitment of a
government to repay its debts and otherwise honor its contracts possible.

