The megastructure theory is readily falsifiable: if we discover ET that lives
on planets rather than inside megastructures, before having discovered any
living in megastructures, my theory will have been shown to have very deep
problems. So it could be falsified tomorrow if we receive any such signal from
a planet that is not accompanied by astrostructures. Even though NASA is so
enthusiastic about the raft of new exoplanets that they sent a raft of Trekkie
prayers to Gliese 581d recently via the Deep Space Network (on which I used to
work), I am about as confident as I can be about any futuristic prediction
that we will get no ET signal from such a planet: if you think about the
expansionist nature of life and society, and cosmic timeframes, the odds are
extremely stacked against it.  
  
OTOH, the theory that all ETs remain huddled forever on their little planets
is not readily falsifiable: the lack of signals by this theory does not mean
that ETI are rare, it just means that ETI are cowardly folk who cleverly hide
from astronomers, like elves and leprechauns hide from anthropologists.  
  
It is useful to think about what other experiments we could do to get a grip
on the probability short of actually observing ETI. Trouble is everything I
can think of confirms it: the way plants colonize lifeless areas within a few
years after a volcano destroys life, the way humans colonized the earth, the
way forests shade most of the sun in their competition for sunlight, and so
on. Our observations confirm rather than falsify the idea that life and
society are generally expansionist, and it is irrational to expect that all
ETI will be otherwise, utopian ideas about "progress towards zero growth"
notwithstanding. Even if the stay-at-home civilizations far outnumber the
expansionist civilizations, we are far more likely to observe the latter.  
  
BTW, I did not mean to suggest that all progress is logistic. In the case of
physical expansion it is polynomial or less: cubic (in three dimensions) or
square when the vertical dimensions of the galactic disk are reached.  
  
This is by no means the most important issue of the day, but it is an area I
know well that illustrates your tax money at work. Astrobiology, far more
exciting than boring old geology, seems to have become NASA's primary
rationale for space science funding, despite it being a science without a
subject. For reasons I explain above, astrobiologists have strong incentives
to grossly exaggerate the probability of finding ET life. For various reasons
I expect the mainstreaming of astrobiology to become the mainstreaming of
SETI, and for SETI to become a big justification for NASA's science budget in
the future. That may be wrong but it's the trend I'm seeing with the exoplanet
discoveries.  
  
Far more important is the trillion-dollar debate over climate science. This
also seems to involve quite a bit of quasiscience and pseudoscience on both
sides, and quite a lot of government-funded scientists who claim they are
neutral. Since many people know more about the climate than I, I will leave
that debate to others, but some of the general points I make above, that I
have learned from observing the debates about future technology and SETI and
astrobiology (which I do know quite a bit about) may also apply to the debate
over predicting the climate decades out. Are, for example, computer climate
models imminently falsifiable? Which climate scientists are willing to make
short-term predictions? How do the various scientists, pro or con, justify
their funding, and how might this bias their stated or actual beliefs? These
and many similar questions related to the above points about futurism may be
useful to ask about climate science.

