In response to this Wall Street Journal article, describing a number of
scholars developing mathematical models of market bubbles, I posted the
following comment at Marginal Revolution which is worth reposting here:  

> The scholars quoted in the original article sound like they are just
engaging in a fancy form of technical analysis, which purports to capture in
mathematics the psychology of the crowd, but in almost all cases turns out to
be worthless numerology.  
>  
> The fancy math doesn't explain bubbles any better than [Robert] Schiller's
simple driving analogy: there is a big event at an obscure location (let's
call it Burning Man, out in the middle of the desert somewhere). People
driving to the event are very uncertain of the directions. At a certain
intersection, on average 60% of them correctly believe they must turn right
and 40% incorrectly believe they must turn left. But they can usually reduce
their uncertainty by observing the behavior of others, who are somewhat more
likely to be correct than wrong, and altering their [probability estimates]
accordingly. Normally this works, but on rare occasions it goes wrong: for
example, if the first three cars happen to turn left, the fourth, who had
believed with 60% confidence that right was the proper direction, will
rationally change his mind and go left. Thus a string of bad luck can make all
the cars start going off in the wrong direction, except for those handful of
drivers that are strongly confident in their knowledge that one should go
right.  
>  
> Where this analogy goes off the rails as public policy analysis is with the
tacit hubris that certain academics from sufficiently elite schools are flying
above the whole event in a helicopter and can direct traffic, if only their
mathematical analysis is fancy enough. Rather academics and policy makers are
in the traffic themselves, generally seeing information biased in ways similar
to or even more extreme than the information investors see and act on. In many
cases mispriced markets create arbitrage opportunities for truly knowledgeable
investors, but analogs to such arbitrage opportunities, i.e. the ability to be
rewarded for correcting actual misinformation, are much less prevalent in
academic and political policy circles. We should thus expect political policy
to be much more prone to biased political fads and herd-following than markets
are. Both markets and governments may often take wrong directions, but for
politics the inability to correct wrong directions may be endemic. Markets
tend to correct themselves, usually in the short run and practically always in
the long run, depending on the costs of arbitrage, but there is often no easy
way to recognize or correct a political bubble.  
>  
> Thus, applying the same rational uncertainty assumptions to politics as we
do to markets, if we give political decisionmakers the power to "pop" bubbles
they think they recognize, they will probably tend to make genuine market
bubbles worse, will prevent markets from sending genuine supply and demand
signals, and will introduce other extra transaction costs.

