Copyright (c) 1998 by Nick Szabo  
permission to redistribute without alteration hereby granted

The Brehon law of Ireland lasted from pre-Roman times until the 1600's. Our
primary interest is in the relatively isolated era preceeding the Viking
invasions.

The Brehons were travelling judges and lawyers who had undergone extensive
training. Like ancient Germanic law, a tort-like system of fines replaced
criminal law, and the entire legal system was, relative to continental and
modern legal systems, decentralized and competitive both in terms of both
adjudication and enforcement. "Kings" were often more powerful than other
persons both in their ability to hire Brehons and their ability to enforce
Brehon edicts (or defy them). The law also recognized different classes of law
based on property ownership -- the most commonly applied class of law being
the "Fenechas", the law of the free tillers. However, the system did not have
a legislative nor executive branch. The system was very much intermingled with
sacred ritual.

I will briefly discuss some interesting aspects of the commercial law.
Contracts ("cor") were based on "mutual understanding, mutual agreement,
mutual consent, and surety given". Mutual agreement required "nothing
hidden...no malicious intent...no coercion". Surety came in three forms:

    
    
    (1) Naidn: Oath pledging one's honor (reputation)
    (2) Aitire: Oath pledging one's freedom
    (3) Rath: Surety given by a third party of types (1) or (2)
    

Presumably most monetary damages were based on an underlying type (2) pledge,
the potential to lose one's personal freedom (i.e. exposure to legal physical
force), although "face" in one's tauth (extended family to four generations)
plaid such a large role that it probably also incentivized obeying a fine.

For Aitire a particular third party, with a good reputation as an enforcer,
was agreed to by the principles. Rather than being assumed any time
significant mutual business promises were made (as in English and Continental
law), the ability to invoke physical enforcement was an optional part of the
contract and had to be an explicit part of the agreement to have force of law.
This may have greatly reduced invocation of and dependence on physical force
to incentivize remedy, which may be more efficient in a decentralized and
competitive law system.

I also found a wonderful bankruptcy procedure. The idea of a "withe-tie"
corresponds loosely to my idea of a "smart lien". The "withe-tie" is some kind
of visible band tied around the debtors' tools. Also "if a Bard or physician
is the debtor immobilize his horse whip for both ride their circuits". Since
this is largely symbolic, the debtor is on honor to not remove the withe-tie,
and thus to do no work, until the debt is paid.

In my version, taking advantage of computer controlled machinery (most capital
equipment now takes this form), a "smart withe-tie" could literally shut down
the machinery. However, I find the law as described too harsh. I would let the
debtor operate the machinery. My protocol would rather enforce that any
revenues gained via the activity should go to the creditor first; if any
revenues beyond the most essential costs are instead retained by the debtor
then the machinery is turned off. In my interpretation a withe-tie would not
have shut down the tool but rather indicated that the tool was dedicated to
the sole purpose of paying off the creditor.

My hi-tech "withe-tie" is something of a departure from my discussion of
Brehon law proper, but you can see why I have found the Brehon law system to
be a valuable source for constructing the law of the coming digital millenium.

My thanks to Eileen O'Connor, J.D. for introducing me to this wonderful
resource.

Please send your comments to

