Tom, thanks for the great comments. Your sports stadium example is wonderful.
Firms do indeed mix these different types within the scope of their business.
They have a large advantage over governments by being specialized and having
substantial knowledge about their customers within that specialty. I wouldn't
expect sports stadium officials to respond well to a new situation, though
(such as having to house hurricane victims), since it's outside their
specialty.  
  
I don't agree that rationing by government works very well. It appears on the
surface to be very rational (give each person X amount of commodity Y), but
the needs of people for commodity Y often differ greatly and are not easily
discoverable by people not normally in the business of distributing commodity
Y -- which include the general population who receives these vouchers in
addition to the government. If vouchers could be easily traded electronically,
a la EBay, this could substantially mitigate this knowledge problem, so I
think that is a very interesting suggestion.  
  
Another problem with such schemes (which are also implicit insurance
schemes)is moral hazard, but that is beyond the scope of what I have been
exploring in the article.  
  
A recent study tends to support the idea that first-hand knowledge is
important to responding to emergencies, although the effect may diminish and
be outweighed by other factors beyond a very local scale. Louisiana residents
ranked various instutitions for the effectiveness of their response to
hurricane Katrina. Churches ranked higher than national charitable
organizations, and both ranked higher than governments. This can be explained
by the Austrian theory of distributed knowledge I sketched above. Very local
institutions in which participation is high, such as churches, have far
greater knowledge of their members' needs than do national charities or
governments.  
  
An unexpected result of the survey is that the federal government generally
scored better than local agencies. This may be explainable as (1) political
bias if the poll was weighted towards rural Republicans rather than urban
Democrats, (2) unique local politics in Louisiana which may not work similarly
in other parts of the U.S. or the world, (3) the level of participation and
thus mutual knowledge between both residents and any level of government is
low, or (4) that beyond the most local of governments (e.g. a small rural town
or an urban ward community group) with long-term and first-hand knowledge of
the victims, the level of mutual knowledge is so low anyway that further
distance makes little difference.

