After a long stint of research and thought I have returned to share some of
the results.  
  
In the early 19th century the Reverend Thomas Malthus, foreshadowing Charles
Darwin, wrote:  

> Throughout the animal and vegetable kingdoms Nature has scattered the seeds
of life abroad with the most profuse and liberal hand but has been
comparatively sparing in the room and the nourishment necessary to rear them.
The germs of existence contained in this earth if they could freely develop
themselves would fill millions of worlds in the course of a few thousand
years. Necessity, that imperious all pervading law of nature, restrains them
within the prescribed bounds. The race of plants and the race of animals
shrink under this great restrictive law and man cannot by any efforts of
reason escape from it ... Wherever therefore there is liberty the power of
increase is exerted and the superabundant effects are repressed afterwards by
want of room and nourishment.

This is the Malthusian trap: any improvements in institutions, technologies,
or any other improvement in labor productivity will over the course of a few
generations increase the population until it once again flirts with
subsistence levels.  
  
Delayed marriage and plagues can delay or reverse such population growth for a
time and produce higher than subsistence standards of living, but, with some
small variations (see diagram below), eventually our Darwinian proclivity to
procreate will return our descendants back to subsistence levels.  
  
But just as Malthus was writing, his Great Britains were becoming the first
living things to ever break free of the Malthusian trap. As a result, in the
21st century the developed world has both populations _and_ standards of
living never before achieved.  
  
We can picture the progress of civilization in Malthusian terms. Click to
enlarge and examine this schematic diagram:  
_Click to enlarge._  
  
In this chart, the horizontal axis represents, on a logarithmic scale, the
human population per area of land adjusted for natural (but not artificial)
variability in its potential to support human food production. Such an
adjusted area is typically called by ecologists a "global hectare" and my
phrase "natural global hectare" represents a hypothetical measure of this
independent of all human labor and capital improvements.  
  
The vertical axis represents per capita nutrition derived, via human labor and
capital, from this ecology.  
  
The slope line or "labor productivity isocline" represents, intuitively
speaking, a level of civilization. In other words, a level of technological
and institutional progress. More specifically, it represents food production
output per worker (productivity) adjusted for the marginality of ecology being
used. As the isoclines move up and right, a given unit of labor is producing
more human nutrition from the same global hectare. So our own 21st century
agriculture is far more productive than 19th century British agriculture,
which in turn was far more productive than medieval European agricultural,
which in turn was more productive than Neolithic agriculture, which in turn
was more productive than hunting and gathering.  
  
As we move along a given isocline (a given "level of civilization" as just
described) we experience the Malthusian tradeoff: more population per global
hectare with lower nutrition, or less population per global hectare with
higher nutrition. As we escape from the Malthusian trap, nutrition itself
becomes satisfied and the left axis really represents a more general per
capita income. Prior to escaping from the Malthusian trap, nutrition dominated
the average human budget with fuel (mostly to cook food), clothing, shelter,
etc. usually less than 20% of a personal budget or the overall economy.  
  
A number of interesting patterns emerge from this kind of analysis. First,
roving bandit societies such as hunter-gatherers and pastoral nomads tended to
have lower population levels and higher per-capita nutrition than stationary
bandit societies (settled agriculture). The Western European Dark Ages is an
interesting intermediate case. This certainly suggests that most prior
analyses of Malthusian tradeoffs, which have focused on pure economics, are
very incomplete -- that security and politics play a crucial role, and not
just in the trivial sense wars and other causes of mortality. There are good
reasons of security of property and capital investments to expect this
difference between roving and stationary bandits, as I hope to describe in
future post(s).  
  
The main question I hope to answer in forthcoming posts is: why did our escape
from the Malthusian trap happen when and where it did, and not elsewhere? This
will probably involve exploring a wide variety of technologies and
institutions and especially the key factors of capital investment and
security.  
  
One obvious possible answer -- and the most likely reason humans will continue
departing from the Malthusian trap for some time to come -- is birth control.
But the British population up to the late 19th century was booming and seldom
made effective use of birth control, so this can't explain Great Britain's
initial escape from the Malthusian trap. A second answer is to invoke the
industrial revolution. But this is a vague term and risks getting at least
some of the causation backwards, as one of the factors enabling the industrial
revolution was a large swelling of the British industrial work force because
improving farm labor productivity meant that fewer farm workers could feed
more people. And it neglects a third crucial factor, the transportation
revolution. And it risks focusing on technology when institutional changes
played a crucial role. All of which I hope to explore and to discuss with my
readers.  
  
Meanwhile, for now I leave you with the following fascinating looks at London
and Beijing early in the 20th century. See if you can spot a difference
between the two societies which I find crucial. Indeed it is visually obvious
and is implicit in a theme of the Chinese documentary. The internal combustion
engines are irrelevant for our pre-20th-century purposes. Escape from the
Malthusian trap was well underway by the early 19th century and the difference
I have in mind had existed to some extent at least for many centuries. But if
you're into more trivial pursuits see if you can spot the two "horseless
carriages" on the London streets.  
  
London in the 1900s:  
  
  
Beijing and some other Chinese locales in the 1920s:  

