Alrenious:  
 _If the music store exists first, the doctor would not put their office
there, instead choosing a noise-free location, unless they can obtain an
agreement to lower the volume._  
  
This is fine insofar as we can assume that contracts are enforced. (Normally
we can, unless we are trying per Friedman or Becker to invoke Coase to explain
either why we don't need governments or why governments are a good solution to
the problem -- such invocations of Coase are fallacious because Coase assumes
voluntary transactions, which can't be assumed unless good law already
exists).  
  
While I generally favor the "first there wins" rule of nuisance, because as
you observe (absent transaction costs per Coase) it can allow Coaseian
bargaining, various transaction costs such as the contract incompleteness
problem (can a contract identify and deal properly with all potential
threats?) often make it impractical. Perhaps for this reason real nuisance law
doesn't always favor the first resident. However, I'm reasonably comfortable
with invoking the Coase Theorem in this case, assuming good contract
enforcement institutions already exist, in order to emphasize the importance
of transaction costs (like contract incompleteness) as Coase did and his wiser
followers have.  
  
This one is the bigger problem:  
  
 _If the office exists first, the music store has a moral obligation not to
unilaterally impose harmful externalities for its own enrichment._  
  
It's fine to invoke moral obligations until the cows come home, but that does
not mean people will follow them. I have shown that, absent good tort law, it
is in the rational self-interest of the music store to impose such
externalities even to the point of turning them into low-cost threats
(weapons). And the theory seems to describe the real-world behavior of mafias,
pirates, governments, and other coercive institutions, whereas Coase-based
theorems (and economics generally) run into huge problems when dealing with
coercive phenomena, because economics has traditionally and usually tacitly
assumed voluntary transactions, which in turn requires a sophisticated legal
system. Many, including too many economists, fail to realize this and invoke
these theories where good legal systems can't be assumed.

