More good comments, thanks Devin. A few nits and other comments:  
  
 _If you know the cash flow, figuring out the price at which you should buy is
not too difficult._  
  
Mostly true for stocks, but much less true for housing, for which
utility/consumption is also an important factor. For commodities instead of a
cash flow one somehow has to tease out the utility/consumption factor, which
is difficult.  
  
Also, looking at historical cash flows doesn't give you all or perhaps even
most of the information needed to predict future cash flows, expectation of
which is what the flow demand curve component is based on.  
  
 _In practice, buybacks mostly just cancel out the dilution from issuing
options to employees._  
  
Nevertheless, a better practice is to add up the cash flows. Trim Tabs (no
affiliation) keeps good track of non-dividend cash flows. Add in dividends and
an appropriate discount rate, and one may be well on the way to calculating a
collectible premium for stocks.  
  
_In our fractionally reserved world, credit conditions and inflation are close
to the same thing._  
  
True.  
  
 _[Dilution] If the collectible premium gets too high, people build more
housing, open up new iron mines, etc._  
  
The same is true for gold. And the _relative_ price compared to other
commodities is important, because commodities are often a big input into the
extraction of other commodities (e.g. steel prices for ships, pipes, etc. are
a big factor in the cost of extracting oil), and labor prices in the long run
tend to rise to catch up with commodity prices.  
  
 _[Due to Long term, the collectible premium can never be higher than the cost
of production._  
  
Not true for gold, and not true for other commodities. MM's analysis simply
assumed that we must converge on a single store of value and medium of
exchange. That's clearly not the case for a store of value and is only true
for the medium of exchange where the transaction costs of handling multiple
prices and currency exchange are substantial. See my response to the MM
article you cited.  
  
 _If the dilution rate of good X is 2% a year, and the dilution rate of good Y
is 5%, then X will appreciate in terms of Y._  
  
But in fact oil has over the long run risen at least as fast or a bit faster
than gold.  
  
The differential dilution rate has much to do with storage costs. If it costs
about the same to store oil in the ground (by not pumping it) as to store
bullion in a warehouse, owners of oil fields can decide not to pump. If one is
in a strict zoning area where it's very hard to build new housing, you also
get very little dilution. (This could explain the huge premium for coastal
real estate).  
  
Some difference may come about via a different mechanism than you suggest,
i.e. substitution -- in the case of oil, people substituting other energy
sources for oil, for example. Oil has to go pretty high for that to be
substantial, though -- we saw some reduction in demand, but not a large
reduction, at $140/barrel. Since gold price is dominated by its collectible
premium this is presumably less of a problem for gold.

