There are irreducibly complex quantum effects in biochemistry. For example,
the mechanical causes of the efficacy of even simple catalysts are often ill
understood. Enzymes and ribozymes are very complex catalysts. The mechanical
action is quantum, and our ability to reduce data about it to simple models is
limited not only by the complexity of their structures but also by quantum
effects such as the uncertainty principle.  
  
The protein folding problem, although it contains many quantum effects which
have posed a severe barrier to predicting the folding of new amino acid
sequences, is as Mike implies limited in its irreducible complexity by the
finite number of biological proteins each of which usually takes on a
particular general shape based on its sequence. (Some proteins, such as
prions, can take on multiple shapes, but usually a small number of specific
shapes rather than a random selection from combinatorial possibilities). For
that reason, the complexity of the protein folding problem for known natural
proteins is ultimately limited, and is more a matter of logical depth than
irreducible complexity as you say. Although we don't undestand the quantum
mechanics by which each folding occurs we could simply catalog all known
proteins and their structures.  
  
However our understanding of other important parts of biochemistry, for
example the catalytic mechanisms of enzymes, will probably be ultimately
limited by irreducibly complex quantum effects, although as with proteins we
may expect that evolution has favored repeatable results for natural enzymes
to the extent possible. We will probably be able to predict much of this
repetitve function without understanding much about the specific quantum
mechanics whereby it happens.  
  
I've struck through the protein folding bit, because that's a bad example, but
my claim that there are some limits of irreducible complexity in biochemistry
remains.  
  
Even if our understanding of biochemistry could be made simple, the complexity
of society would remain vast and too complex for the full understanding of any
small fraction of human minds, for the reasons stated.

