Byrne: _Why do the puzzling at all, rather than issuing a fixed amount of
currency inflated at a predictable rate, with unique identifiers for each unit
of currency?_  
  
This is an interesting idea, something like the idea that the Fed should
follow a simple algorithm rather than trying to outguess markets. But the real
question for beating bit gold is how do we do this without having to put full
trust in third parties? If we can figure that out, we've come up with
something better than bit gold. ("We" as usual on this blog being just whoever
wants to explore the possibility, not "the government" :-)  
  
Real trusted third parties, whether central banks or private note issuers,
have always been tempted to overextend and overinflate, although occasionally
the reverse happens. They are also vulnerable to government takeoever. Any
algorithm, like the gold standard of old, is likely to be modified in a
"crisis": a trusted third party cannot make a strong credible commitment to
keep running the same algorithm.  
  
Possibly the money issuing algorithm could be run by many parties in parallel
manner, a technique known as Byzantine agreement. Indeed, this is the same
technique used to run the bit gold title registry. All participats would agree
to (1) generate a fixed number of unique (large random) numbers each week, (or
a number inflated by some predictable algorithm), and (2) assign each by some
fair algorithm to one of participants. Each timestamped random number becomes
a rare collectible, like postage stamps. I can see where this would work! It
will take quite a bit of thinking over, though, as we've eliminated one of
things that bit gold users can approximately prove, i.e. the original cost of
the gold.  
  
Byzantine security is far from perfect. In layman terms it just means that
when everybody sends everybody else the same message, far more people have to
be corrupted in order to fake the message than if the message is sent through
one or a few people. Thus any given party is trusted only to a very small
degree, but there is still that small degree of trust. There is a much
stronger temptation here than with bit gold to inflate the currency, since it
can now be costlessly "printed" instead of "mined": it's much more likely that
a sufficiently large number of people could be corrupted. Still, it's an
intriguing idea worth developing even if for no other reason than it gives us
another concrete plan to compare bit gold to.  
  
 _as long as the marginal benefit of extra bits is lower than the marginal
cost of running computers, people will keep their computers running when
they'd otherwise shut them down, to easily arbitrage this difference._  
  
I'm sorry, but this doesn't make any sense to me: do you mean to say "higher
than" rather than "lower than"?  
  
Some computers are more energy efficient than others, some have more spare
cycles than others, some algorithms and custom circuits will solve puzzles far
faster than others, and so on, so there will be great differences in
profitability, and as in gold mining the market will evolve towards only a few
of the best specialists in puzzle solving making a reasonable profit. Indeed,
the technological differences between chips and algorithms are likely to be
far _greater_ than with gold mines, which is why we can't make the bits
themselves fungible from week to week in the first place: the technology
improves too fast.

