Hampton Sides' book _Blood and Thunder_ is a detailed and colorful account of
the Western frontier in the United States around the mid-19th century, mostly
from the Mexican War to the Civil War. It is half biography of the trapper,
guide, and soldier Kit Carson, who participated in a wide variety of
interesting and important events, and half general history, mostly of what is
now the Southwestern U.S. and much of that in New Mexico, where Navajo,
Apache, Pueblo, Mexicans, and Americans collided. There is also some coverage
of the prior history and prehistory of the Mexicans and "Indian" (aboriginal
American) tribes in the area. Sides seems to have no theoretical axe to grind,
and indeed doesn't try to explain events in terms of political or economic
theories, but rather simply relates a large number of incidents in unabashed
detail, letting readers draw whatever theories, if any, the reader might wish
to draw. Nevertheless Sides' account of the old U.S. frontier does shed quite
a bit of light on a number of theoretical topics I have discussed here.  
  
Most of the book involves interactions between Indian tribes, often nomadic,
and agricultural-based Mexican and Anglo-Saxon cultures. The Navajo, for
example, were nomadic herders that also profited from stealing, usually
livestock, from nearby Pueblo, Mexican, and later United States ranches. In
his account of prehistory Sides relates how, a few hundred years before
Columbus, the spectacular pueblos (apartment buildings) of the Anasazi farm-
based civilization in the Chaco Canyon were abandoned just as the Navajo were
migrating into Anasazi territory from the north. Sides invokes as the main
reason the popular ecological theory: that the Anasazi declined due to
depleting nearby resources such as soils and forests, and suggests the Navajo
as a contributing reason.  
  
I think this gets it backwards. The Navajo entry at the same time the
Anasazi's pueblos were abandoned is no coincidence, it is the main cause.
Faced by a militarily superior group of roving bandits, the Anasazi's
agricultural property was no longer secure. The Anasazi, ruled by stationary
bandits, were conquered by the Navajo, nomadic herders and hunters. Further
evidence that Mancur Olson's bandit theory, rather than ecological theory,
explains the abandonment of their civilization in the Chaco Canyon is that the
Anasazi culture didn't disappear, it declined and moved. Their descendants are
the Pueblo Indians, and they dispersed to build a pueblos at the fringes of
the Navajo territory. ("Anasazi", incidentally, is a Navajo term meaning
"ancestors of our enemies"). Accelerated depletion of resources is a symptom
of insecure property rights: where property is insecure people act (with
respect to natural resources rather than with respect to fellow humans) as
roving bandits, whereas secure property owners extract their resources like
stationary bandits, i.e. at a much lower and far more sustainable rate.  
  
Per Olson the Navajo, being roving bandits (with respect to both people and
fixed resources) would have had a far higher Laffer maximum extortion rate and
thus were not able to accumulate wealth to support a level of civilization
nearly as high as the Anasazi under stationary bandits had supported. The
Pueblo Indians and later the Mexicans who bordered the Navajos and other
roving bandit cultures were able to support agriculture, but were far poorer
than other most other fully agricultural regions of the time due to the costs
of Navajo and Apache raids. The fall of the Anasazi was hardly the first time
roving bandits had conquered stationary bandits causing a massive decline in
wealth and civilization: it is a common pattern throughout history.  
  
(Incidentally, the Laffer maximum for banditry from a sedentary neighbor,
where there are a few but not many competing bandits, is probably somewhere in
between the maxima for fully roving and fully stationary bandits: Sides
recounts how the Navajo would not steal _every_ animal from their Pueblo or
Mexican neighbors during raids, but made sure to leave them enough breeding
stock to rebuild their herds).  
  
There are a large number of people who, following David Friedman, use the
Coase Theorem as if it applied to the coercive bargaining that occurs in an
anarchy. Sides' relentless accounts of attacks and reprisals put a lie to this
Coaseian analysis of anarchy. The Navajo came as close, perhaps, to anarchy
has any recorded culture has ever come. They had, for example, no sovereign
leaders with which to make binding treaties. When American generals tried to
make treaties with individuals they thought were Navajo chiefs, they would
find that said "chiefs" could not actually enforce treaty terms, at least not
beyond their own small band. Thus promises, for example, by Navajo "chiefs" to
stop animal-stealing raids turned out to be unenforceable, because these
"chiefs" could not actually punish young men in the many other Navajo bands
for their raiding. (Even with sovereign governments there is still a tension
between limiting the scope of sovereign power, e.g. by a doctrine of
enumerated powers or by federalism, and giving the federal government complete
"freedom of treaty", i.e. the ability to enter treaties on any subject, or at
least in suppression of any kind of coercion, that they can actually enforce
against their citizens and residents).  
  
Coercion in all the forms one can imagine, and many that one would rather not
try to imagine, was endemic to life among the native American tribes and to
relations between those tribes and encroaching civilizations of the Mexicans
and later Americans. Raids involving theft (especially of livestock), looting,
kidnapping, rape, murder, war, massacre, torture, extortion, mutilation of the
living and the dead, and many other, shall we say, non-Coaseian interactions
were a normal part of the external relationships between the Indian tribes and
between the encroaching civilizations and those tribes. "Counting coup", that
is keeping track of wrongs that needed to be avenged, was standard among the
Indian cultures and became standard among people like Kit Carson who dealt
with them. Another interesting phenomenon is that the tit-for-tat cycle of
violence between tribes was often based on group blame: rather than solving
the (usually insurmountable) problem of identifying and punishing the
particular perpetrators, missions of vengeance would usually target relatives,
fellow tribe members, or even broader groups that happened to be convenient.
Sometimes Indians aggrieved by a white attack would even take revenge on
whites generally, for example the next group of white emigrants to come down
the Santa Fe Trail, and this far too often happened in the reverse direction
as well. Sometimes individual blame morphed into group blame when a tribe to
which an alleged perpetrator was thought to belong failed to arrest and
surrender the accused. This circumstance was especially used by American
armies to justify invasion, massacre, and ethnic cleansing of tribes that
refused to surrender or punish (often because they had no sovereign power to
capture or punish) their thieves, kidnappers, and murderers. The role such
group blame plays in contemporary politics is left as an exercise for the
reader.  
  
Mancur Olson's explanations fit Sides' detailed accounts of life in an anarchy
far better than the the Coaseians'. The trajectories of the Anasazi, Navajo,
Pueblo, Mexicans, and Americans are classic cases of interactions between
stationary and roving bandits. The Laffer maximum extortion of the stationary
bandit is far lower than the combined Laffer maxima of the roving bandits.
Most kinds of farms can operate economically only if those stealing from the
farm are stationary rather than roving.  
  
Finally, Sides gives a sad account of the utopian social engineering that led
to America's Indian reservation system. Bosque Redondo (the Round Forest) is a
tragic example of this: an idealistic general of New England upbringing, a
forerunner is spirit at least of the Bellamies, rounded up the Navajos,
marched them off to a promising-looking but empty stretch of the Pecos River
and tried to teach them sedentary agriculture. The general's overall reason
for for conducting this experiment was not inaccurate: in Olson's terms, the
Navajo would give up their roving banditry only if converted into (or put
under the thumb of) stationary bandits. But just as the Navajos did not learn
to live like Anasazi, but instead displaced the Anasazi culture with their
own, so they could not readily learn to live like Mexicans or Americans, or
even like Pueblo Indians. For example, for religious reasons they stubbornly
refused to live in pueblos (apartment buildings) and these had to be
abandoned. Worse, the project had most of the trappings of utopia we would
later see in the Soviet Union: forced concentration and mass movement of
peoples, communal farms, and military-style central planning. The communal
property and military command structure under which the Navajo were subjected
utterly failed to replicate the property rights and other crucial aspects of
legal systems under which Mexicans and Americans had successfully conducted
their agriculture. The Bosque Redondo experiment was a miserable and deadly
failure. Stationary bandits can also destroy rather than allow the building of
civilization if their policies are sufficiently pathological.

