In modern commodity markets one can exchange money for commodities at almost
zero transaction costs. These markets thus reflect not just the supply and
demand of the commodity, but also the supply and demand of the currency they
are priced in.  
  
Because they combine liquidity with short- and medium-term supply
inelasticity, mineral commodities are a good way to hedge a falling currency.
When the supply of money increases or is expected to increase, whether because
of lower nominal or real interest rates, because the bank that issues the
currency is buying government treasury bonds or (like John Law of Mississippi
Bubble infamy) mortgage-backed securities[*], or for any other reason, a
disproportionate amount of the expected or surprise increase in money supply
is soaked up by commodities. Indeed the commodities with the most liquid
markets and inelastic supply, such as oil and gold, tend to move in lock-step
with each other. Such price movement is strong evidence for the movement being
primarily a phenomenon of changing money supply or demand rather than of
changing supply or demand for particular commodities. If oil prices were
rising primarily due to rising industrial demand for oil, or primarily because
oil was getting more expensive technologically to produce (e.g. "peak oil"
theory), we'd expect them to move quite differently than gold, which is
demanded for primarily non-industrial reasons and has a vastly greater
inventory/production ratio on the supply side than oil. That's not what we see
-- we see oil and gold moving together, and indeed the price of oil in terms
of gold and silver has been practically flat in the recent commodity boom.
This is almost entirely due to expected or actual increases in the supplies of
the currencies they are traded in (and especially recently in the weak dollar)
rather than to "real" factors.  
  
This inflation only slowly percolates into price rises in other goods and
services, which tend to be far more rigid than commodities. Wages are
particularly rigid. Because the U.S. Federal Reserve and most other central
banks regulate their money supplies based on trailing indicators of
inflation(e.g. consumer price indices) rather than leading indicators
(commodity prices), it is no surprise that their decisions tend to produce
boom-and-bust cycles in commodities, and that to a lesser and more delayed
extent they cause both general inflation and recessions. No uncommon demand
from China or the like is needed to explain the recent commodity boom, just as
no such rise in demand or long-term fall in supply was needed to explain the
very similar commodity boom in the 1970s. But since most people judge supply
and demand of a commodity by nominal price, both in the 1970s and now we get a
lot of irrational hysteria about "running out", "peak oil", how our energy
industries and consumption are "unsustainable", etc. I'll believe that when
oil per barrel doubles or more with respect to gold and silver. When they move
together, we're just being fooled by monetary instability, and most of the
current disproportionate increase in investment in energy supplies and
conservation, whether traditional or renewable, is malinvestment in response
to highly distorted nominal price signals, as is the accompanying political
bubble of "energy security", conservation enforced through idiotic micro-
regulations (e.g. banning traditional light bulbs), and so on.  
  
Another way of putting this is that, when currencies become unreliable as a
store of value, commodities take on part of that monetary role. Both oil and
gold increase in value by performing this monetary function better than the
currency against which they are being traded, better than credit instruments
denominated in that currency, and even better, in the short term, than stocks
of companies that do business primarily in that currency. The joint movements
in oil and gold reflect their value, relative to the currency they are priced
in, performing the monetary function of a store of value. Global supplies and
industrial demands for minerals are far less volatile than the change in their
value in this monetary role. It's the logical emergence of money from barter,
but this emergence goes on every day that liquid commodities act as a better
store of value than the currency in which they are priced. Contrariwise, as
the currency becomes a better store of value than the commodity, these
commodities move back down towards just being commodities valued only for
their consumption. Thus their exaggerated moves, both upward and downward, in
reaction to changing expectations of future increases or decreases in money
supply.  
  
Due to their exaggerated moves and the relative rigidity of most non-commodity
prices, commodities themselves are an imperfect store of value. They react far
more than the general level of prices to both increases and decreases in money
supply, or changing expectations of same. If the Fed stops playing John Law
and desists from buying bad mortgages, if others besides the Fed soak up all
the new Treasuries produced by large federal budget deficits, ifcounterparty
risk in credit markets subsides, the Fed can raise rates, sell securities and
retire the money, and otherwise take steps to lower the money supply and
stanch inflation. In such a case, commodities will react disproportionately on
the downside, as they did in the 1980s. If the Federal Reserve can't do these
things, dollars and dollar-denominated securities will continue to decline and
people will increasingly turn to commodities to protect their nest eggs. All
the ads I see and hear for gold these days suggests the peak of a commodity
bubble is near, but on the other hand credit markets may worsen due to the
continued crashing of the previous bubble (the housing/mortgage bubble),
federal deficits may continue to increase, and the Fed may thus buy even more
securities, making commodities even more attractive. I'm thus afraid that I
have no buy or sell recommendations for you, dear readers. :-)  
  
[This comment is based on a comment I recently made at the Marginal Revolution
blog].  
  
* [Obligatory Wikipedia links: John Law, Mississippi Bubble, BearStearns bailout]  
  
[UPDATE: reader Byrne Hobarth has linked to this excellent analysis of the
commodities market. This study debunks the theories that trends in supply or
consumption demand, very steady over the last century, have greatly changed
over the last decade. In particular, increased demand for many commodities
such as copper in China has been offset by slows in growth or declines in
demand in Europe and the U.S.  
  
The studies' thesis is that the commodity runup is largely just a bubble. The
study shows the spectacular rise in commodity derivatives. These represent far
more contractual liability or asset than the underlying commodities. Treating
commodities as money, this to me looks like a new emergent form of fractional
reserve banking, but reconstructed in the investment rather than the banking
sector. These derivatives, on this view, act essentially as private fractional
reserve currencies, backed by a variety of commodities. The report views all
this as evidence of a bubble. It points out we haven't yet seen the consumer
inflation of the previous commodity bull. I emphasize _yet_. Consumer prices
are a _trailing_ indicator, and I believe the commodity markets are more
rational in anticipating and reacting to money supply increases than they were
in the 1970s thanks to the dominance of derivatives. The development of these
new kinds of currencies, though prone to the risks and errors of novelty, are
largely rational.]

