Here's the transcript of a more in-depth radio interview with Russell Tice. I
am happy to see that this former government employee is, unlike some other
government employees, working hard to "preserve and protect the Constitution
of the United States" instead of to create loopholes that effectively destroy
it. He talks about, among other things, how he discovered an FBI agent
following him, how secrecy by classification and compartmentalization
encourages criminal activities at the NSA, and how the FISA court is an
oblivious rubber-stamp unless the NSA is asking to do something very blatantly
illegal. This strongly suggests that the NSA by avoiding the FISA court is
hiding programs that are very illegal and very dangerous to our democracy.  
  
Tice observes that, by combining the Justice Department's highly distorted
view of surveillance law with its disgusting opinions on detainment and
torture, "you could have potentially somebody getting the wrong phone call
from a terrorist and having him [the receiver of the phone call] spirited away
to some back-alley country to get the rubber hose treatment." It is already
well known that completely innocent people have been detained and tortured by
the CIA, and that American citizens have also been detained as "enemy
combatants," with the so-called "Justice Department" arguing that all of these
anti-democratic, anti-freedom, and anti-human activities are perfectly legal.  
  
Tice has offered to testify to Congress on the NSA spy scandal, observing that
"[t]he freedom of the American people cannot be protected when our
constitutional liberties are ignored and our nation has decayed into a police
state." That police state has been advanced by but did not begin with the
current Administration. It has its main origin in the legal opinions of the
Justice Department. That Department has often urged substituting very poor
procedures internal to the executive branch for the real checks and balances
between branches, for example judicial search warrants, called for by the
Constitution. Tice's scenario has a frightening high "potential[]" of
happening if the Justice Department does not stop writing self-serving legal
briefs that mislead the President, the Congress, the Supreme Court, other
government employees, and the American people.

