Danielle Citron has written an interesting article on liability for leaks of
data like social security numbers (SSNs) that many organizations use as
authenticators. Use of such weak authenticators increasingly results in failed
(i.e. false) authentication ("identity theft") that harms a victim by imputing
to that victims debts or bad credit history. Citron argues that the handling
of such "personal data," like the reservoirs in _Rylands v. Fletcher,_ should
be deemed an "ultrahazardous activity", and thus that those who handle
personal data should be held strictly liable for any damages caused in fact by
the handling of that data (in particular, by leaks of that data subsequently
used by "cyber-criminals" to harm a victim).  
  
There are several things wrong with Citron's analysis:  
  
(1) Strict liability, like other forms of liability, is generally limited by
proximate cause. Indeed, I've never heard of strict liability coupled to mere
cause-in-fact. If there is a data leak by Trent that enables Mallet to falsely
authenicate himself as Bob, which failed authentication is then depended on by
Alice resulting in harm to Bob, both Mallet and Alice are intermediate causes
of Bob's harm. There is thus cause-in-fact but no proximate cause between
Trent's data leak and the harm to Bob. Indeed, the typical identity theft
involves a chain of causation quite remote from the data leaker and thus far
beyond where courts have ever dared to tread. This is in sharp contrast to the
completely unmediated causes in all previous ultrahazardous activity strict
liability regimes.  
  
The case Citron cites about the landlord being held liable for the harm of an
assault inside his property arose as she states under negligence, not strict
liability. Furthermore it was a rare exception, it is not the rule. In most
states this would go the other way. The same issue of intermediate cause has
rendered futile attempts to hold gun sellers responsible for crimes committed
with their guns. The relation between the typical data merchant and the person
referred to in the data is far more distant than the landlord/tenant
relationship. Even the gun seller is fewer intermediate causes away from the
harm of a typical murder than an SSN leaker is to the harm of a typical
identity theft victim. Quite often the origin of the identity thief's false
authenticator simply cannot be established, whereas the organization that
depended on the false authenticator and proximately caused bad credit or false
debt is well known.  
  
(2) The article assumes data held by trusted central authorities who have the
ability to protect this data at a relatively low cost, and that if they cannot
protect it then society could do without the activity. The first assumption is
questionable given the existence of tiny data fobs and many other ways to
steal or accidentally lose data beyond the control of the organization. Citron
debunks the second assumption herself by pointing out how ubiquitous and how
important the use of such data is.  
  
Furthermore, just about every organization in our society, and many
individuals, handle data which could be used to harm people. It's hard to
imagine articulating a rule clear enough (by, say, restricting it to specific
kinds of data such as SSNs) to cover most of the risks, yet to put the risks
on the major data brokers in particular but not on the rest of us. If strict
liability is restricted to certain poor authenticators (e.g. SSNs) but not
others (e.g. legal names), data brokers and authenticators will simply switch
their activities to use the non-covered authenticators, which are often even
weaker, the result being even greater levels of identity theft.  
  
(3) Citron does not provide a clear set of rules, but clear and complely
objective rules, and methods for gathering unambiguous evidence of violations,
are crucial for a regime of strict liability.  
  
(4) A much better alternative is to let liability lie on organizations that
use information known to be widely distributed and often leaked, such as SSNs,
as authenticators, and on organizations or individuals who most proximately
cause the harm of identity theft -- those who even in good faith falsely
report the victim's name to a credit bureau or try to collect a false debt
from the victim that was incurred by depending on a false authentication of
the victim. These situations are far more analogous to the landlord case --
like the landlord, they have established a relationship with victim; at least
they have after falsely reporting the victim's name to a credit bureau or
trying to collect a false debt from the victim. Indeed they are more proximate
to the victim than even the identity thief: the thief fraudulently used the
victim's authenticators, but the thief was not the party that directly harmed
the victim by putting the false information on the victim's credit report or
by attempting to collect a debt the victim did not in fact incur.  
  
(5) Citron's "data reservoir" metaphor is facially attractive, but as with
most physical metaphors applied to information it is highly misleading. The
"water" (data) leaking here causes no obvious direct damage like a flood.
Rather when data leaks it does not cause any damage until it is used by other
parties, like water being used for irrigation. Applying Citron's reasoning to
the latest _e. coli_ contaminated spinach harm, Citron would make liable not
the immediate seller of the spinach, nor the packager, nor even the grower who
used the contaminated water. Instead Citron would put the liability on the
rancher whose cattle produced the _e. coli_ in the first place, even though
_e. coli_ is inevitable ingredient of manure and thus an inevitable part of
ranching activity. Citron's strict liability rule would brinig the entire
business of cattle ranching to an end. Just the same, in a world of laptops
and fobs and a variety of other conduits, data leaks are an inevitable part of
the indispensible business of handling data, and Citron's rue would
devastatingly bring this business to an end.  
  
Bottom line: liability should be put on the low-cost avoider. This is not
merely a rule of negligence but a guideline for determining where any kind of
liability should fall in any new area of commerce. The idea that the data
brokers are the low cost avoiders in this system is highly implausible.
Rather, here as with most other harms, it is those parties most proximate to
the harm who can most easily prevent it. Furthermore, the evidence needed to
hold parties liable will be far more reliably available for the proximate
harmer than the remote data leaker.  
  
Organizations that use widely distributed and easily leaked data like SSNs as
authenticators, and who currently depend on such weak authentications for
credit reporting and debt collection, can switch to more secure passwords at
lower costs than would be imposed by Citron's regime. Organizations that fail
to use secure authenticators, especially organizations that report information
to credit bureaus or attempt to collect debts based on insecure
authenticators, should bear the liability for identity theft due to the known
insecurity of those authenticators, rather than organizations who inevitably
leak already widely distributed data.  
  
H/T: Emergent Chaos.

