If Mike Huben is saying that the law should be about mechanism, not policy,
then I heartily agree. Yet Mike gets this philosophy blindingly wrong when
applying it to the law.  
  
It is the highly evolved common law that got this wisdom most right:  
  
Contract law: provide mechanisms for making and enforcing contracts, not
policy about who can contract with whom for what.  
  
Property law: provide mechanisms for transferring, collateralizing, devising,
and protecting the quiet use of property, rather than policy dictating who can
build what where.  
  
Tort law: use the edges or surfaces of the body, property, etc. as boundaries
others may not cross without consent of the possessor, rather than dictating
detailed rules for each possible harm.  
  
Et cetera. Under the common law we "write" (sometimes literally, as with
contracts or wills) the policy of our own lives. The common law "create[s]
user freedom by allowing them to easily experiment..." as Mike says about
X-Windows. Our judges are supposed to accumulate a common law, and the
legislatures write statutes, that are a "systems code" for our interactions
with others. We, by our own agreements with those we specifically deal with,
"write" within these basic mechanisms the rules that govern our own
interactions with these others. The guiding philosophy of our legal code
should indeed be mechanism, not policy.  
  
Of course, law as well as software is not quite this simple, and judges and
legislatures sometimes (but not nearly as often as they would like to think)
must make some hard policy choices for exceptions and edge cases. Also, as
Mike proves in his essay with absurd and awful statements such as "I think
that the rights specified in the Constitution and Bill of Rights are there for
purposes of mechanism, not to directly protect individual rights," what is
"mechanism" and what is "policy" is often in the mind of the beholder. In this
case, the Founders (which for the Bill of Rights are the anti-Federalists, not
generally the Federalists as Mike suggests) clearly had in their minds that
the main purpose of the mechanisms was to protect individual rights,
especially as those rights had evolved under the common law which Locke and
the Constitution summarized as "life, liberty, and property." "Life" and
"liberty" occur three times in the Constitution; "property" is protected in
four different places. Mike's beloved welfare state, on the other hand, occurs
nowhere in the Constitution. Much of the Constitution was intended to protect
the mechanisms of the common law from the hubristic policymaking of
legislatures and the arbitrary actions of government officials.  
  
The recent great strides of progress in human history, such as the Industrial
Revolution, the Information Revolution, and the abolition of slavery, were
propagated by common law countries. Countries lacking the common law have
often fallen into authoritarianism and totalitarianism. The common law has
proven that mechanism, not policy, is a very wise philosophy for law as well
as for systems software. Mechanism, not policy, is a philosophy that all of us
should aspire to when opining or voting on laws, and it's a philosophy judges
should apply when interpreting them.

