I see that we agree generally about the U.S. Supreme Court, although I would
not say that it is more powerful than either Congress or the Executive. When
push comes to shove, Congress can legally take away Court jurisdiction over
particular areas of subject matter. The Republicans almost succeeded with
their continual efforts to remove federal court jurisdiction over abortions,
which would have allowed state courts to "overturn" _Roe v. Wade_. And in
extreme cases the Executive has, quite illegally, simply ignored the Court (as
Andrew Jackson did explicity with the Cherokees, and G.W. Bush has probably
done at least implicitly with surveillance and detention). The L.A. County
Sheriff releasing Paris Hilton in violation of her sentence is an example in
microcosm of this kind of executive nose-thumbing at the judiciary. Then of
course there was FDR's "Court-packing" scheme -- Congress can probably also
change the number of Justices, addding as many as desired to achieve the
"right answer."  
  
These threats can greatly influence important Court decisions as it tries to
satisfy the other branches enough to avoid these underminings of its
authority. They are among the major reasons why the Court has ultimately given
in to the New Deal and every other major political trend.  
  
BTW, I think you'll find that the Court has rarely ever been less libertarian
than the rulemaking nexus of Congress and the regulatory agencies. Quite often
it ratifies unlibertarian positive-rights statutes and regulations, but when
it creates rights they are almost always of the libertarian negative variety.
(There are of course also many equal-rights cases like public school
desegregation which are largely orthogonal to the positive-negative rights
axis).  
  
There's a possible huge exception to that claim (or possibly not) -- Chevron
deference. This joins Footnote Four in the pantheon (or layers of hell) of
cases crucial to the rise of the regulatory state.  
  
My instinct is to say that _Chevron_ is a profoundly unlibertarian decision,
as it gives more power to regulatory agencies, but upon reflection I wonder if
it is true. It is of course profoundly undemocratic. It effectively weakens
the ability of Congress to control the regulatory agencies. Congress is spread
far too thin to competently write clear statutes, so there are usually vast
gaps and ambiguities for the regulatory agencies to play with.  
  
So the real question for _Chevron_ may be, is the rulemaking process of
Congress more or less libertarian the the rulemaking process of the agencies?
The answer, unless one reflexively supports "democracy", is by no means clear.
If industry lobbying on average reduces regulatory burden (as it did in
_Chevron_ ) more than it increases it, and (as is likely) the lobbying of
regulatory agencies (experts on narrow subject matter) is more efficient than
lobbying Congress (experts at nothing), then _Chevron_ will tend to produce
more libertarian rules. I'd love to get your opinion on the matter.  
  
BTW, it may be just a few short steps from _Chevron_ to Juristopia. This is
left as an exercise for the student. :-)  
  
In Juristopia, none of these attacks on the Court by other branches would be
possible, so those who don't like Court verdicts would then have much more
reason to complain about Court powewr.  
  
As for Calhoun: I agree it might be a good idea for States to be able to
nullify federal statutes and regulations, (i.e. get rid of the Supremacy
Clause). Even better would be to allow persons by contract to nullify any laws
as they pertain only between them (by expanding choice-of-law clauses). I'm
nevertheless strongly in favor of a 14th Amendment-type incorporation regime
to make the States respect basic procedural rights, imposed centrally upon any
coercive procedure that involves high exit costs (e.g. habeus corpus appeals
of imprisonment). I am opposed to the ability of any high-exit-cost regime to
secede from respecting basic procedural rights.

