Here's a good video lesson on the difference between legal defense of people
within a dwelling and murder in a castle doctrine state. The narration by the
announcer here is not clear: the unarmed (it turns out) robber goes down
because the pharmacist (the defendant) has shot him in the head. The armed
robber flees without firing a shot. The prosecution claims the unarmed robber
then lay there unconscious, which is plausible given that the defendant turned
his back on him. The prosecutor argues (correctly, if we accept the
prosecution's version of the facts) that the first shot to the head was proper
self-defense, whereas the later five shots (the video is sped up) were not
justifiable self-defense. The defense argues that the injured robber was
getting back up and thus, even though not brandishing a weapon (and as it
turns out unarmed), could have posed a danger justifying the five shots that
killed the injured robber. From seeing on the video the pharmacist turn his
back on that robber I'm skeptical of the defense's version of the facts, but
that's up to the jury.  
  
  
  
Note that calling the police immediately afterward, as here, is a very good
idea -- not calling the police as soon is one safely can is a very bad idea,
suggesting guilt -- but it probably won't be enough in this case to save this
guy from some jail time.  
  
Ignatius Piazza, a self-defense trainer, has a good collection of videos on
this case. Local TV station KRMG has a version with the prosecutor narrating
the surveillance video (a much better but obviously biased narration).  
  
Not mentioned in these videos is that the armed robber who ran away was also
and quite properly charged with murder -- what is called a _felony murder_ ,
because he committed a felony that led to a death, even death caused by a
victim of that felony as here.  
  
Technically, all the Oklahoma statute does is shift from the defendant the
burden of proving "a reasonable fear of imminent peril of death or great
bodily harm" when killing somebody who has forcefully entered a dwelling or
vehicle -- instead the prosecutor must prove that the fear was not reasonable.
Here, the burden of proof does shift to the prosecutor, but, again assuming
the facts are as he claims, he should be able to prove beyond reasonable doubt
either that the pharmacist in fact had no such fear, or that any such fear of
harm from an unconscious man was unreasonable.  
  
Even assuming the injured robber had regained consciousness, a much better
course of action would have been to have the women at the back of the store
call the police and to hold the gun to the robber's head until the police
arrived.  
  
I strongly second Ignatius' advice that if you own a gun that you may one day
have to use for self-defense, that you take a good training course. Military
training is _not_ sufficient for this and indeed may have led this pharmacist,
a military veteran, astray. Military doctrine is a very different thing than
the civilian law of self-defense and the castle doctrine. I do take issue with
Ignatius' simplistic description of a supposed "universal" rule for when self-
defense is justified. Some jurisdictions allow far more defense of self,
others, and persons within dwellings or vehicles than he describes (especially
castle doctrine and stand-your-ground states), and some allow less. If you are
going to have a gun around for self-defense, you should learn the laws of your
own state, province, or country and you should train yourself accordingly. The
laws vary widely. If you aren't willing to learn the laws and train
accordingly, as this pharmacist apparently failed to do, you shouldn't keep a
gun. By using a gun against criminals you are, morally speaking, deputizing
yourself as a law enforcer -- a very good thing, since the police usually
can't get there in time to protect victims, but a status that comes with a
moral responsibility to train yourself in how to legally use a gun. Self-
defense and castle laws give you this authority; misusing these rights is what
the prosecutor properly (again assuming his version of the facts) calls
"exceeding authority" and thus murder. Note that under the recent _Heller_
Second Amendment case, self-defense and defense of others is a primary
justification for our right to own a gun in the first place in the U.S.  
  
The castle doctrine under common law, as well as the quite related knock-and-
announce rule for law enforcement, comes from Semayne's case: "That the house
of everyone is to him as his castle and fortress, as well for his defence
against injury and violence, as for his repose...if thieves come to a man's
house to rob him, or murder, and the owner or his servants kill any of the
thieves in defence of himself and his house it is not felony, and he shall
lose nothing." Modern castle statutes, such as Oklahoma's, often also apply
this doctrine to businesses and vehicles. The Wikipedia article on the U.S.
castle doctrine has a list of states with stand-your-ground laws and castle
laws, with links to the statutory texts.  
  
By the way, political scientists who define governments as entities having a
"monopoly of force" are idiots. I just thought I'd get in that shot of my own
while I'm here.

