Today was the start of that glorious lost cause that ultimately won, the 1956
Hungarian Revolution. That event is today's featured article on Wikipedia.
Since Hungary finally won its freedom from communist rule and Soviet control
in 1989, October 23rd has been a national holiday.  
  
Communism was an ideology based on envy of the rich but resulting in
devastation to all. The keys to Soviet power were control over business,
borders, and ideas. Control of the "commanding heights" of the economy and in
particular control over food distribution made it highly dangerous to oppose
communists rulers.  
  
The Soviet bloc severely restricted exit, a policy known as the "iron
curtain." A communist state was a vast prison camp: the government fed you and
you were not allowed to leave. Except for a brief period during the 1956
Revolution, this state of affairs lasted until Hungary opened its borders to
free Austria in 1989, leading later that year to the fall of the Berlin Wall
and freedom in Eastern Europe.  
  
 _Victim of communist genocide in the Ukraine, 1930s._  
  
The Soviets had a control over the observed reality and beliefs of its
subjects that is hard to imagine in today's Internet era. The communist party
owned all broadcast stations and newspapers and severely restricted smaller-
scale means of communications such as telephones, small printing presses, and
copy machines (and later faxes and computers). Government art encouraged
secular worship of a godlike Marxist _avant-garde_ , echoing the deification
of emperors in imperial Rome.  
  
  

 _A crucial event in fighting totalitarianism: rebels took control of a radio
station from the communist media monopoly and redubbed it "Magyar Szabad
Radio" (Hungarian Free Radio)_  
  
Thus, although the Soviets had already murdered millions, directly and through
robbery of food and other vital supplies (as in "Ukranian famines" under both
Lenin and Stalin), little was known about these events: behind the iron
curtain all mention of them was excised from academia and media; outside the
iron curtain they were unknown, denied, or ignored. To this day these events,
collectively the greatest mass murders in world history committed by any
ideological movement within a single century, remain largely forgotten thanks
to the remarkably successful efforts of Soviets in destroying or simply
failing to report publicly the evidence.  
  
 _Meatspace blog: messages for rebels in shop window._  
  
The resignation of the Stalin-era dictator Mátyás Rákosi under pressure from
the new Soviet dictator Kruschev in July of 1956 emboldened Hungarians to
speak somewhat more freely among themselves. László Rajk, judicially murdered
under the Rákosi regime, was reburied and celebrated and the anti-Stalinist
Imre Nagy (pronounced "Nahj") was invited to rejoin the Hungarian Worker's
Party (the communist party and the only legal party). On October 16th students
in University of Szeged boycotted the official party student union and
reestablished the non-communist MEFESZ student union which had been banned
under Rákosi. Soon students all over Hungary followed suit.  
  
 _Students demonstrating._  
  
Members of the Hungarian Writer's Union and students, numbering over ten
thousand, gathered to demand reform on October 23rd -- 50 years ago today --
at the statute of General Bem, a hero of Hungary's War of Independence in
1849. Students who had brought some Hungarian flags started cutting out the
hated communist red star from the flags, leaving ragged circles. By 6 p.m.,
the crowd had crossed the Danube to the Parliament Building. Enthusiastic
locals swelled it to probably well over a hundred thousand. Some enthusiasts
toppled the largest Stalin statue, leaving his boots.  
  
 _Stalin's boots._

The government radio stations, the only ones allowed, railed that the crowds
were "reactionary mobs." ("Reactionary" was the favorite insult of self-styled
"progressives" in both the Soviet bloc and the West.) In response a crowd
gathered at Radio Budapest, guared by the State Protection Authority
(Államvédelmi Hatóság or ÁVH), the communist Hungarian equivalent of the U.S.
FBI. When some of the crowd's leaders expressed demands for equal time on the
radio to rebut the government's slanders, the ÁVH detained them and the crowd
grew even angrier. Soon the ÁVH fired tear gas into the crowd, and soon after
that started shooting into the crowd. Hungarian soldiers (of the regular army)
were sent in to assist the ÁVH, but when some soldiers witnessed the
protestors being fired on they mutinied, joining the crowd. The crowd and its
new army recruits fanned out, siezing control of military depots and
distributing guns. The Revolution had begun.  
  
 _Rebels overan the communist party's headquarters and cut out the hated red
star from the Hungarian flag._  
  
 _Ghandian non-violent resistance only works where there is a well-established
free press sympathetic to the resisters. This was certainly not the case
behind the iron curtain in 1956. After the ÁVH fired on unarmed protestors
most of the Hungarian Army sided with the protestors, defended them from the
ÁVH, and helped them capture the government radio station. With control of the
radio station rebels were able to broadcast their rebuttals of the
government's slanders, to call for justice against the murderers of
protestors, and to make their case for anti-communist reforms._ _Military
depots were raided and arms distributed to civilian rebels, defeating
communist gun control._

