I've read Berman and indeed recommend him. As far as substantive law goes, I
tend to agree with him. The late Roman Empire was a bottleneck through which a
remnant, but still a rich remnant, the ancient law that had been evolved over
millenia in Sumer, Babylon, Phoenicia, and Rome had passed. So the Justinian
Code contained many ideas and concepts that helped enrich property law and the
developing Lex Mercatoria.  
  
But in terms of procedural and constitutional law, it gave the sanction of
ancient authority to the late Roman absolutist and totalitarian view of
government. This view would give authority to the Tsars and Kaisers
("Caeasars"), the emperor Napoleon, and in the 20th century to Lenin, Stalin,
Hitler, and Mao. Late Roman legal principles would end up destroying the
alternative paradigm of political property rights (which once dominated the
West but have now been almost completely forgotten) and would severely hamper
efforts to separate powers. And would spawn absolutist theories of sovereignty
such as those of Bodin, Hobbes, and Carlyle.  
  
DeLong in his post sounds like the traditional university professor, still
swimming in the thousand-year-old fish tank of university ideology (with
origins in teaching Justinian's Code). Still reflexively defending its hero,
absolute central government, and failing to ask, for example, whether the
local lords were actually doing a better or worse job in providing more
security for less taxation and violation of rights. Instead the "local thug"
is automatically the bad guy -- no evidence needed.  
  
He might try doing as I have and actually reading some primary history, for
example John of Lydia, a tax collector under Justinian who describes in horrid
detail the effects of Constantinple's taxes on the farmers of their em]mpire.
All the more credible in being what we in the law call a "declaration against
interest."  
  
And reading Procopius who describes how Justinian chose to fight foreign wars
of conquest rather than guarding Byzantium's borders against foreign invasion
or enforcing the law at home. Said problems of foreign invasion and crime
provided plenty of good reasons for local landlords to hire their own security
staff.  
  
A thousand years after the recovery of the Justinian Code and the birth of
universities, professors like DeLong are still prostrating themselves
intellectually to Justinian, just as Tribonian prostrated himself physically.  
  
Much more in this hopefully in future posts.

