Gregory Clark (via Marginal Revolution) has a new and more comprehensive data
set on real wages in England from 1209 to the present. Up to about 1600, it is
consistent with the Malthusian theory that real wages varied inversely with
population. But then from at least 1630, there is a remarkable and
unprecedented departure from the Malthusian curve formed by the ratio of real
wages to population. Real wages rose over 50% from 1630 to 1690 despite rising
population. There is then a stable period from 1730 to 1800 with a new curve
parallel to but offset from the original Malthusian curve, and then a second
startling departure from 1800 to today reflecting the end of this last
Malthusian epoch (ironically just as Malthus was writing).  
  
This data contradicts the idea that nothing remarkable happened to the economy
before the industrial revolution got going in the late 18th century. It also
contradicts the theory that a qualitative shift occurred due the the Glorious
Revolution of 1689 in which Parliament gained more power, some Dutch financial
pratices were introduced, and soon thereafer the Bank of England founded.  
  
Rather, the theory that comes most readily to mind to explain an economic
revolution in 17th century England is the rather un-PC theory of Max Weber.
I'll get back to that, but first Clark debunks the theory of Becker et. al.
regarding family investment. According to this theory, parents choose between
the strategy of having a large number of children and having a small number of
children in whom they invest heavily, teaching them skills. This is basically
the spectrum between "R strategy" and "K strategy" along which all animals
lie, except that with humans there is a strong cultural component in this
choice (or at least Becker et. al. claim or assume that family size has always
been a cultural choice for humans -- see my comments on this below).  
  
According to this family investment theory, until quite recently (perhaps
until the industrial revolution) having more children was the better bet due
to lack of reward for skill, and overall underdevelopment of the economy
limited the reward for skill, so the world was caught in a Malthusian trap of
unskilled labor. However at this recent point in history rewards for skilled
labor went up, making it worthwhile for parents to invest in skills (e.g.
literacy). Clark's data contradicts this theory: his data show that the ratio
of wages for skilled to unskilled laborers did not rise either in the 17th
century revolution or during the industrial revolution, and actually were in
substantial decline by 1900. Indeed, a decline in demand for skilled labor is
what Adam Smith predicted would happen with increasing specialization in
manufacturing. Thus, there was no increase in reward for skill investment
which would have pulled us out of the Malthusian trap. Thus, Clark also
rejects the family investment theory.  
  
I think, however, that part of the family investment theory can be rescued.
Clark's and other data on literacy demonstrate a substantial rise in literacy
just prior to and at the initial stages of the qualitative change in
productivity. Literacy in England doubled between 1580 and 1660. Parents were
in fact making substantial investments in literacy despite an apparent lack of
incentive to do so. Why?  
  
My own tentative theory to explains Clark's data combines Becker, Weber, and
the observations of many scholars about the cultural importance of printing.
Printing was invented in the middle of the 15th century. Books were cheap by
the end of that century. Thereafer they just got cheaper. At first books
printed _en masse_ what scribes had long considered to be the classics.
Eventually, however, books came to contain a wide variety of useful
information important to various trades. For example, legal cases became much
more thoroughly recorded and far more easily accessible, facilitating
development of the common law. Similar revolutions occurred in medicine and a
wide variety of trades, and undoubtedly eventually occurred in the building
trades that were the source of Clark's data.  
  
Printing played a crucial role in the Reformation which saw the schisms from
the Roman Church and the birth in particular of Calvinism. The crucial thing
to observe is that, while per Clark the gains from investment in skills did
not increase relative to unskilled labor, with the availability of cheap books
and with the proper content the costs of investing in the learning did
radically decrease for many skills. Apprenticeships that used to take seven
years could be compressed into a few years reading from books (much cheaper
than bothering the master for those years) combined with a short period
learning on the job. This wouldn't have been a straightforward process as it
required not just cheap books with specialized content about the trades, but
some redesigning of the work itself and up-front investment by parents in
their children's literacy. Thus, it would have required major cultural
changes. That is why, while under my theory cheap books were the catalyst that
drove mankind out of the Malthusian trap, many institutional innovations,
which took over a century to evolve, had to be made to take advantage of those
books to fundamentally change the economy.  
  
Probably the biggest change required is that literacy entails a very large up-
front investment. In the 17th century that investment would have been
undertaken primarily by the family. Such an investment requires delayed
gratification -- the trait Weber considered crucial to the rise of capitalism
and derived from Calvinsim. However, Calvinist delayed gratification under my
revised theory didn't cause capitalism via an increased savings rate, as Weber
et. al. postulated, but rather caused parents to undertake a costly practice
of investing in their children's literacy. Once that investment was made, the
children could take advantage of books to learn skills with unprecedented ease
and to skill levels not previously possible. So the overall investment in
skills did not increase, but instead the focus of that investment shifted from
long apprenticeships of young adults to the literacy of children. At the same
time, the productivity of that investment greatly increased, and the result
was overall higher productivity.  
  
Investment in literacy would have both enabled and been motivated by the
famous Protestant belief that people should read the Bible for themselves
rather than depending on a priest to read it for them. This process would have
started in the late 15th century among an elite of merchants and nobles,
giving rise to the Reformation, but might not have propagated amongst the
tradesmen Clark tracks until the 17th century. It is with the spread of
Huguenot, Puritan, Presbyterian, etc. literacy culture to tradesmen that we
see the 17th century revolution in real wages and the first major move away
from the Malthusian curve.  
  
This theory that the Malthusian trap was evaded by a sharp increase in the
productivity of skill investment explains why population growth did not fall
in the 17th century as Becker et. al. would predict. Cheap books substantially
lowered the cost of skill investment, so the productivity gains could come
without increasing the overall investment in skills and thus without lowering
family size.  
  
The family size/skill investment tradeoff is more likely to explain the second
and sharper departure from Malthusian curve starting around 1800. However
again I think Becker is wrong insofar as this was not due to an increase in
returns on skill (Clark's data debunks this), but due to (1) technology
improving faster than humans can have children, and (2) the rise of birth
control (without which there is little control by choice or culture over
family size -- no cultural family size choice theory really works before the
widespread use of birth control).  
  
The catalyst in moving away from the Malthusian curve was thus not, per Becker
et. al., an increase in the returns on investments in skills, but rather a
decrease in the costs of such investments once cheap books teaching
specialized trades were available and the initial hill of literacy was climbed
by Calvinist families. If the Calvinist literacy-investment theory ("The
Roundhead Revolution") is true, we should see a similar departure from the
Malthusian curve at the same time or perhaps even somewhat earlier in the
Netherlands, and also in Scotland, but probably not in Catholic countries of
that period.

