Another "whole/part" issue is treating the Praetorian Guard as a whole. In
fact like other military institutions it had a commander, the Praetorian
Prefect, whose orders other Praetorians had to obey. Unless they did something
to violate this standard, the Prefect would just make himself emperor, and
then we're back to the problem of how is the Prefect chosen, etc. (turtles
standing on turtles ad infinitum).  
  
This problem can be broken by saying that there is at least one specific
civilian situations in which you do _not_ follow your superior's orders -- for
example, when a secret ballot is taken among the Praetorian Guards to choose a
new emperor. But even in that case, I suspect they are likely to choose the
commander they are accustomed to following.  
  
Veering away from succession to other legal procedures, the English derived
their legal system from the system of military orders. The system started from
military conquest but the subsequent civilian administration soon evolved in a
very interesting direction. They developed a system of civilian judicial
orders from the king that _had to be in a very specific form_ -- much like a
computer program cannot have a syntax error. They had to be orders about a
very particular subject, a particular person, and so on, and the purpose of
the syntax was to make sure the superior officer stayed within these bounds.
Because if these orders, called _writs_, contained an error, they _did not
have to be followed_.  
  
Thus, for example, _habeus corpus_ was a writ, an order from a king's judge in
the name of the king, to bring a specific prisoner in front of the court and
show just cause why he must be released. It had to be in a specific form,
naming a specific prisoner, otherwise the sheriff could ignore it.  
  
With this system the judge or king in his civilian role can issue certain
important orders to his subjects, e.g. other officers or other holders of
political property rights, but can't order the them to do just anything like
the king could order his inferiors when at war.  
  
IMHO, the writ system was the single most important innovation in the history
of law. The writ system was a deep and powerful system, an ancestor of the
U.S. system of enumerated powers, but far less subject to expansive
interpretation as U.S. courts have done with the Commerce Clause and so on.

