More good comments on the monstrous legislation from Jack Balkin, Jack Balkin,
and Glenn Greenwald. The best comments are from a bunch of law professors, who
attach the text of the Senate bill. I am no Democrat, but I couldn't agree
more with Greenwald that our most urgent and important tasks here in the U.S.
this fall are to end one-party rule of the federal government and to punish
politicians who have voted away our freedoms. Toward that end here is the list
of Representatives who voted for and against arbitrary detainment. See my
prior post to determine how your Senators voted.  
  
Per Balkin's comments, and the comments of many who supported this
legislation, an individual right of action in court -- i.e. _habeas corpus --_
has for many hundreds of years been the first line of defense against illegal
imprisonment. Often it the _only_ way for a prisoner to make his case heard.
Without a right of action in court, any and all of the Bill of Rights, the
Geneva Convention, and so on are just theoretical. That the a member of the
executive branch would be doing something illegal by detaining innocents
indefinitely, committing torture, and so on is moot unless it leads to
impeachment or a court hearing. The possibility of impeachment, extremely
unlikely even if the Democrats win in November, and no matter how many illegal
acts the executive branch adds to the probable thousands it has already
recently committed, is no substitute for the right of a person to defend his
or her own rights in court. Furthermore, even if the President were impeached
this would be not nearly enough to disincentivize the failure of much of the
rest of the executive branch, as the Constitution commands them, to "take care
that the laws be faithfully executed." The fate of a short-term denizen of the
White House is not that big a deal to a career bureaucrat who is doing the
immediate law breaking. Faithful law enforcement depends crucially on the
ability of the targets of that enforcement to defend themselves in court.

