Besides the extraordinary rises in commodity prices and near-tripling of the
U.S. federal government's default risk, another important factor for those
interested the world's economy to keep in mind is that foreign governments
have been bailing out the U.S. federal government by buying more of its
Treasury bonds. Much of the increase in inflation expectations, and now in
overt default expectations, reflected in commodity prices probably comes from
the possibility that this ongoing foreign bailout of the U.S. may at some
point stop and reverse. If foreign central banks and sovereign funds suddendly
dumped their Treasuries -- which paying a negative real interest rate and
exposing one to dollar risk are after all a rather bad investment -- either
the Federal Reserve would have to madly "print" trillions of dollars to buy up
these Treasuries, causing oil prices to skyrocket still further and retail
gasoline prices to quite possibly jump each week by dollars per gallon, until
American cars, trucks, and airplanes would be useless, or the federal
government, facing extraordinary costs of funding its deficits, would have to
overtly default. The problem the Federal Reserve faces is that with modern
digital markets any inflationary behavior on its part is reflected in oil
prices as soon as any big money learns about said behavior, and is thus
usually reflected at the retail gas pump within a week. I wrote in the above-
linked post about sovereign debt risk of "covert default" through inflation,
but that is an obsolete phrase -- you can go down to the local gas station and
see these de facto federal defaults in progress. If foreign governments
thought the Federal Reserve was going to hyperinflate, that would probably
cause them to dump the Treasuries in a kind of self-fulfilling prophecy. It
would be a run on the federal government itself, the biggest run on a bank the
world has ever seen. This is not a probable risk, but it has now become a
quite signficant risk.  
  
The ongoing foreign bailout of the U.S. government by massive purchases of
Treasury debt helps explain two things: (1) why U.S. Treasuries and bank rates
related to them don't seem to be reflecting inflation expectations (i.e. why
they are paying negative real interest rates compared to the expected
inflation suggested by commodity prices) -- their price is being held
artificially low, not just by Federal Reserve net purchases but by foreign
central bank net and sovereign fund purchases as well. Add to this the natural
reduction in their interest rate due to the credit crunch causing a flight for
safety (in a credit cruch people are willing to pay even negative real
interest rates for a relatively safe investment). The foreign bailout also
explains (2) why commodity prices have raced so far ahead of PPI and CPI
inflation. Commodity prices may reflect, not so much increases in the dollar
supply beyond dollar demand that have already happened, nor even expectations
of a steady future consumer inflation that will happen eventually, nor an
iminent severe consumer inflation is sure to happen soon, but expectations of
a severe consumer inflation that mostly hasn't happened yet and may not
happen, and of a possible Zimbabwe/Weimar-style hyperinflation that probably
won't happen. But the increase in the probability of severe inflation combined
with a great increase in the formerly extremely small (and still small, but
not extremely so) probabilities of the more extreme hyperinflation still
averages out to rather high inflation expectations.  
  
Why are central bankers bailing out the U.S. federal government and its dollar
rather than acting like rational profit maximizers? Central bankers and
government treasury officials are very political animals, and they fear the
disaster they believe would ensue should the "full faith and credit of the
United States [federal government]" fail. It is the most unthinkable economic
event for the entity with the most collosal budget, and the dominant
threatener and wielder of military force in the world, to go under. The U.S.
federal government has now deemed Bear Stearns, Fannie Mae, and Freddie Mac
"too big to fail" and has bailed them out. That federal government itself is
the ultimate entity that is "too big to fail", and thus foreign governments
and central bankers are bailing it out, and will probably (but hardly surely)
continue to do.  
  
Extrapolating from oil prices rises (i.e. assuming the entire oil price rise
has been due to monetary factors rather than to consumption, production cost,
or non-monetary political fundamentals) using the net present value formula
over 50 years, I estimate that long-run dollar inflation expectations have
risen about 5%/year from 1998, when there the Asian crisis caused a flight to
the dollar and many people thought deflation was the bigger worry, to today.
This might for example reflect an increase in expectations from 0% to 5%/year,
or 1% to 6%/year, etc. -- I don't have a way to estimate the absolute value.
Gold price rises over the last decade give a slightly smaller rise in
inflation expectations, of about 4%/year. Note that this doesn't mean 5% or
6%/year CPI or PPI inflation over the next 50 years is inevitable -- increased
expectations reflect a range of probabilities, especially very heightened
increases in probability estimates of extreme (>10%/year) and hyper
(>100%/year) inflation in the dollar. It's also still significantly possible
that the ultimate lagging indicator, "core inflation", will stay in the
2-3%/year range and the whole storm will blow over.  
  
Besides the great rise in commodity prices, in particular the most "money-
like" commodities oil and precious metals, the foreign bailout of the U.S.
federal government is another reason to believe that _all_ major currencies
are falling against a hypothetical stable standard of value, not just the
dollar. As foreign central banks buy more U.S. Treasuries they take on more of
the risk associated with the dollar, so we should expect the floating
currencies these central banks issue to move more in correlation with each
other. Indeed, the dollar has held its own against the euro and against on
average other major currencies since February as foreign central bank
purchases of Treasuries have accelerated.  
  
People interested in my writings about money might also want to check out my
classic essay on monetary origins, "Shelling Out: The Origins of Money", my
classic essay on micropayments, and my overview of the monetary reasons for
the broad-based commodity price increases over the last decade and in
particular over the last five years.

