peco,the game is negative-sum for the same reason a tax is, firstly because
the music store's coercion distorts the behavior of the doctor and his
patients. Assuming the doctor is helpless to stop the noise without making the
payoff (e.g. we artificially assume he can't order a mob hit on the music
store, or poison its customers, or emit any other such "extreme" externality
to avenge or deter the music store's excess externality) he will go golfing
more, and see fewer patients, if he is paying P2 to the store instead of P1.
Fewer patients will be healed, a net loss of welfare. Since we assume the
music store is rational, it will demand only the Laffer-maximum amount of
extortion, but Laffer-maximum taxes still have plenty of distoritve effects
that produce inefficiencies compared to the no-taxation case. Secondly, the
behavior of the music store is also distorted because it has excess profits to
spend. It will invest its extra money in opening new music stores and concert
halls next to other doctor's offices, nursing homes, and similar because that
is a lucrative source of profit, and so other activities that would prefer
quiet will be distorted in turn. It is often unreasonable to assume that
Coaseian payees are spending their extra money efficiently. Interestingly,
shades of Clayton's reasoning, Gary Becker assumed the Coaseian payor's
behavior was not distorted and that the Coaseian payee was spending its extra
profits efficiently, and used this Coaseian reasoning to argue that
governments themselves are efficient outcomes of Coaseian bargaining. Becker's
argument is wrong for the same reason that Friedman's argument is wrong for
legal protection agencies: it doesn't account for the economic distortions
caused by coercion.  
  
To see where these negative-sum games lead, let's take the case of roving
loudspeakers. Pickup trucks drive through the city, parking in front of every
business in turn and demanding large payments to take their noise elsehwere.
The optimal extortion for the extortors in this case is nearly 100% of all
business wealth in the city (again assuming the victims are defenseless),
because if extortor A doesn't extort any remaining wealth extortor B will be
happy to come in and take it. The economy is so distorted that practically
nothing gets produced or distributed and the city's economy collapses. This is
the "roving bandit" case studied by Mancur Olson. Where two stores are next to
each other and neither can move constitute "stationary bandits", as do gangs
or governments with "monopolies of coercion" over fixed territories. As the
roving loudspeakers case illustrates, rational stationary bandits collect a
far lower percent of their victims' profits in taxes than do roving bandits.
(But stationary bandits with the much lower rate than 100% end up collecting a
far higher absolute amount -- recall the Laffer curve) . If on the other hand
we assume the victims are _not_ defenseless, we have negative-sum games like
hawk/dove, negative tit-for-tat, etc. which again are paradigmatically very
different from voluntary Coaseian bargains.  
  
We can measure the effectiveness of an excess (or coercive) externality for
extracting super-Coasiean payoffs by how great a harm the externality can
produce for the least cost to the emitter. The ubiquity of technology that is
very effective in producing the greatest harm for the least cost, i.e.
weapons, in our world should be a very good clue that our world is not
Coaseian. Music volume, spark emission, and so on beyond the "preferered"
level Coaseians falsely assume to be maximal are logically weapons. Their
harm/cost ratio is lower than guns, tanks, bombers, missiles, flamethrowers,
herbicides, and so on, but they have an advantage in being physically hard to
distinguish from merely Coaseian externalities, which would come in handy in a
world where judges and other lawmakers actually based law on the Coase theorem
(the good news is that they mostly don't).  
  
I should note that the basic argument that the Coase Theorem is inapplicable
for political analysis, because it assumes voluntary bargaining and politics
is coercive, comes from Olson. My contributions above are (1) a rigorous
disproof of the claim that the Coase theorem is generally applicable to
externalities, because its assumption are contradictory in both allowing and
excluding coercion, (2) to show the continuum from externalities to coercion,
that the two are not readily separable.

