Daniel, very informative comments. The settled cultures you cite seem to be
primarily Iranian derived (with various nomads absorbed during some periods),
with heavy traditional influence and often control of the Persian empire
(located largely at the periphery, not the interior of Eurasia, and similar to
Rome's control and influence over Western Europe). From eyeballing maps, the
settled farming north of modern Iran seems to have been largely confined to
narrow strips of irrigated fields along rivers. It seems to take the rich
nutrients (not just water) provided by irrigation, and a very mild climate, to
produce a farming region dense and productive enough in the interior of
central Asia to survive, to some extent, the depredations of neighboring
roving bandits. But unlike the more geographically peripheral
Sumer/Assyria/Babylon and Persia civilizations based on such irrigation, they
weren't able to extend that influence to larger regions but rather came to be
much more politically dominated by the neighboring nomadic cultures.  
  
While the relatively lesser amounts of rain in much of the interior is thus a
factor, by itself it would not prevent settled agriculture: it's easy to grow
e.g. winter wheat without irrigation in such semi-arid climates if security is
not a concern. But it doesn't give the productivity needed for a population
sufficiently dense to survive roving bandits.  
  
Exogamy is an interesting theory for why lactase persistence spread more
slowly among the steppe nomads than in the regions of what is now Scandinavia,
the Low Countries, and the British Isles (see maps above). But roving bandits
may provide another explanation. What were the traditional animals used for
milk on the steppe? My understanding is that horses, goats, and sheep were
much more used and cattle much less compared to the lactase persistence core
of northwestern Europe. I suggest this was for security reasons: cattle
represent too large a capital investment in the very exposed nomadic societies
of the steppes. Horses are easier to protect (they can run and escape, often
carrying owners and possessions in the bargain, and as cavalry can help you
defend) while sheep and goats are smaller and more readily dispersed and
replaceable capital investments.

