Alrenous, I agree publishing bias (which favors positive over negative or
inclusive results) is a big problem, as is the funding bias I discussed in
"The Trouble With Science." But even if these biases could be eliminated, many
areas that we would very much like to learn about are inherently difficult.
They are not feasibly learnable via measurement or other attempts at
quantification, and such attempts almost always just lend a false precision.
As the mathematics of and experience with machine learning suggests, some
results in or closely related to physics (e.g. Kepler's laws) are just bog-
easy to discover from the data (OK, bog-easy for a 21st century computer -- it
took humans thousands of years of error to get to Kepler's laws). But increase
the complexity of the object of study and the learning difficulty increases
exponentially.  
  
In the complex areas -- among them nutrition, economics, politics -- we need
to be giving greater weight to kinds of knowledge that have been slighted
since the Manhattan Project and Sputnik raised scientists to an exalted
priesthood, namely tradition: knowledge accumulated across many generations of
people. In nutrition, you probably should be eating what your ancestors for
the last few thousand years -- your ancestors, not somebody else's -- ate
unless strongly proven otherwise. They accumulated thousands of life-long
experiences eating food suited to your particular genetics -- why throw out
all that hard-won knowledge for the sake of impressive sounding pseudoscience?  
  
In academia, we need to favor traditional academic disciplines and methods of
reasoning (e.g. the ones taught in law, the oldest academic discipline) and
start a Darwinian process of pruning down the modern cults (e.g. "social
sciences"). And the fetish with statistics as the sole arbiter of truth needs
to go: we need to relearn the traditional arts of reasoning, for example the
importance of making thoughtful assumptions and clearly stating them instead
of hiding them, like numerologists, behind a blizzard of mathematics and
jargon.  
  
Professor Hanson loves to bash me for failing to read the various papers he
thinks I must read before I'm allowed to state my thoughts on some certain
matter. Reading these idiotic piles of garbage is the last thing any person
concerned with discovering reality should want to do, because practically
every paper he and other "social scientists" laud is (a) written in the novel
terminology and mathematical shorthand of their particular academic cult, and
thus impossible to read without reading a bunch of prior papers written by
that cult's acolytes, and then (b) when you take this tremendous effort to
decipher it, you discover that the paper, and often the entire cult, is based
on idiotic assumptions so that, regardless of the impressive rigor of the
mathematics, the conclusions are a complete load of crap.  
  
Almost every paper I read in these areas is a further instance of professors
lavishly demonstrating their high IQ but utterly failing to do anything useful
with it. To hell with that, life is far too short to get bogged down in the
pseudoscience that dominates much of academia these days. I agree with Peter
Thiel, the smarter you are, the more valuable for society if you drop out of
university. Do what Gates, Zuckererg, et. al. did, get great grades in high
school to get into a top school (so you can prove to strangers in the future
that you're smart) and then drop out. If you are pursuing novel areas come up
with your own ideas. If you are pursuing areas with which humans have long
experience, drink from the cup of tradition. Either way, outside the hard
sciences it's usually wise to stay away from the siren songs of modern
academic fads.

