Abstract: _Both governments and volunary institutions respond quite poorly in
emergencies. Price gouging laws may reflect insurance contracts buyers would
have made ahead of time but for high transaction costs. However, price gouging
laws also decrease incentives to make the abnormal investments required in
emergencies. The author proposes to modify price gouging laws to maintain
their implicit insurance function while removing their interference with
incentives to make abnormal investments during an emergency._

Here are some alternative ways of rationing in an emergency. At least some of
these have been written about by Yoram Barzel. We have witnessed all of them
during hurricane Katrina:

> (1) market prices ("price gouging") (2) waiting in line (3) centrally
planned rationing

>

> (4) don't ration: just let the resource run out

It's not clear that, even with perfect knowledge, with or without an
emergency, centrally planned rationing could operate without using one of the
other methods of rationing. In any case, our very poor knowledge about the
needs of strangers is sufficient to ensure that, short of a perfect price
system, we often can't get what we want without waiting in line, and sometimes
we just can't get what we want (or even, the Rolling Stones notwithstanding,
what we need). The worse the price system -- in other words, the higher the
transaction costs -- the more we wait in line or do without, as East Germany
once demonstrated (cf. West Germany) and as North Korea continues to
demonstrate. Luckily for those of us in largely market price based economies,
we need only wait in line when trying to do business with the government, call
a toll-free service line, go to a hot movie on opening night, or during an
emergency -- i.e. in the remaining situations where prices don't operate very
well or at all, due to transaction costs imposed by law or otherwise.

Mises and Hayek long ago demonstrated the weakness of centrally planned
economies such as the old Soviet Union (or today's North Korea) -- the lack of
knowledge the government has about peoples' needs and desires. Similarly, lack
of the requisite detailed rknowledge of the needs of others, especially at
specific times of crisis when they need our help most, is a huge problem even
if we were perfectly charitable. Not even the local governments exhibited much
knowledge of the needs of their neighbors, especially in New Orleans. Much
less did the state or Feds (FEMA being only the most glaring example) exhibit
even a tiny fraction of the knowledge that would be required for an optimal
outcome. This is not the fault of the people in the government agencies to not
act as knowlegeably as they are capable of acting, but rather the fault is in
their implied promises and our expectations. For example, TV commentators,
watching pictures of some Coast Guard helicopters, seem to have come to expect
that government agencies will swoop down from the sky and rescue everybody and
take on other attributes of God. Such as, for example, being able to
knowledgeably evacuate people and distribute other scarce goods and services
in a disaster.

Per Mises and Hayek, even if the Soviet Union had been run by an perfectly
beneficient dictator, people would have, short of a matching omniscience of
said dictator (and of enough of his underlings to receive and act on the
knowledge) still have waited in bread lines. When price controls hit gasoline
in the United States in the 1970s, people similarly waited in gas lines.

In emergencies rationing becomes extreme: people wait in long lines, pay
"extortionate" prices, or, even worse, do without. We are thrown into
economically unfamiliar territory and transaction costs balloon. Goods will
always be rationed in one or more of the above four ways, and in an emergency
the rationing can be quite severe. Our charitable spirit can temporarily
overcome self-interest, but it can't overcome the knowledge problem or the
scarcity of goods.

Given that waiting in line, or doing without, are very painful (even sometimes
deadly) alternatives, and that allowing the charge of very high prices can
largely prevent use of these extreme and wasteful forms of rationing, why do
we have price gouging laws?

---
Can price gouging laws be explained as follows? In a zero transaction cost
world, consumers would successfully negotiate with retailers for an insurance
policy that caps prices in case of emergency. This may be, for example,
because retailers are better able to bear the risk of emergency supply
shortages than consumers are, or because consumers don't want to bear the risk
of having to have an unusually large amount of money at hand during an
emergency. (Katrina may be a good example of this -- it reportedly struck just
before many paychecks were due, leaving many people who live from paycheck to
paycheck without funds). More generally, if it weren't such a bother almost
all of us would like to purchase insurance against volatile prices in order to
make our budgets more predictable. However, the transaction costs for
negotiating with consumers for such contracts are too high. Therefore, the
default retail sales contract should include such insurance. Price gouging
laws are a convenient way to do this.

---
Whether and when wholesale contracts include such price caps provisions would
provide interesting evidence in favor of or against this hypothesis, and under
what conditions it would have been rational to for consumers and retailers to
have made such a contract.

As we have seen, there is a strong economic argument against price gouging
laws. Consistent application of market pricing during an emergency would
minimize the other inefficient, and occasionally deadly, rationing methods
above, especially (4)actually running out of emergency supplies. Consumers
could be confident that supplies will not run out, so stocking up on excess
supplies based on fear of imminently running out of the supply (such as we've
seen consumers do in some areas recently with gasoline) would be minimized.
Given modern technology, perhaps we should work on improving the availability
of credit and liquidity in emergencies via always-up wireless devices and
immediately payable liquidity insurance policies instead of price gouging
laws.

Furthermore, the promise of very high prices might motivate retailers to fly
in special deliveries of emergency supplies at otherwise prohibitive
transportation rates. On can even imagine for-profit organizations doing many
of the tasks that the National Guard, Red Cross, and similar organizations are
doing now. Of course, the moral indignation would be enormous. For this to
occur, price gouging laws must not remove the incentives to make abnormal
investments (e.g. in abnormally expensive and timely transportation) during an
emergency. People, at least in political discussion, tend to be extremely
averse to "windfall profits" and seem to have a strong psychological
preference for an implicit insurance policy that puts a price cap during
emergencies on retail contracts.

Instead of focusing on the price itself, or on "unjust profits" themselves,
price gouging laws should focus only on profits abnormally proportionate to
expenditures. The windfall profits of a seller who can better spread risks are
a signal that the parties would have contracted to insure the buyer less able
to spread risks against unexpectedly high prices. On the other hand, a seller
who invested very high sums in transportation, in expectation of being able to
sell at very high prices, will not have abnormally high profits (at least not
profits of abnormal proportions). We can keep much of the implicit insurance
function of price gouging laws, while maintaining normal economic incentives
to distribute goods and services in an emergency, by focusing price gouging
laws on profits of abnormal proportion, rather than on profits or prices of
abnormal absolute magnitude.
