George: _there's always the risk that whoever commands the army will be able
to do as he pleases...But I think in new or unstable societies the army is
often pretty much loyal to the commander as an individual. I was wondering if
you have any particular ideas how to keep an excessively assertive military
commander in check._  
  
My ideas for this are not nearly as mature as my ideas for the legal system,
but let me throw out some ideas to chew on:  
  
(0) The right to bear arms is a political property right. For example, the
right to build and deploy nuclear weapons, if it is allowed at all, is a
political property right that is probably held by only one or a few entities.  
  
(1) Except for prescriptive political property rights, political property
rights can only by granted by a democratically elected Originating Congress
that originally holds all non-prescriptive rights, but can exercise none. It
can only define political property rights (rather like the Patent Office) and
(unlike that body) distribute them only by lottery or auction. Note that the
Originating Congress does _not_ have a general power of legislation, it only
has a power to define and grant political property rights.  
  
(2) Armies can only operate both effectively _and_ legally to the extent that
they own the property rights to wield weapons advanced enough for them to win.  
  
(3) Individuals have a prescriptive political property right to be armed for
self-defense and to exercise liberty of house, with the same kind of (but not
substantially superior) arms to their potential aggressors. Thus, if it's
significantly common for home invasion robbers to wield AK-47s, homeowners
have a right to wield AK-47s to exercise liberty of house, but if the worst
weapons commonly used are shotguns, they can own nothing substantially
superior to shotguns. If an army with the advanced weapons starts illegally
attacking the populace, said victims gain the legal right to use army-style
weapons in defense of themselves and their residences.  
  
(4) Killing any enemy combatant falls under the laws of war, but collateral
damage is (at least) negligent homicide, and illegal as such, regardless of
whether one is "at war", but a jury of people chosen from the location of the
deaths may excuse it under a public necessity defense.  
  
(5) The initial allocation of these property rights is prescriptive, i.e.
starting on "day one" every existing armed force has the right to wield what
they wield right now, but only if they agree by treaty to wield them only in
execution of settling jurisdictional disputes according to the law of politcal
property rights. But they don't have the right to develop new classes of
weapons unless granted such.  
  
(6) Mutineers do not inherit the political property rights of organizations
they take over. They become outlaws.  
  
(7) Breach of the boundaries of these military property rights is a trespass,
possibly of a criminal nature, and flagrant breach can result to escheat of
these rights to grantor under _quo warranto_, just as with other political
property rights.  
  
(8) Contempt of the verdicts of a court adjudicating these political property
rights results in outlawry and is a declaration of war against all law-abiding
wielders of political property rights.

