Good comments. A few rejoinders:

Not what I meant by "individual", but I love the parallel between imaginary
gods and imaginary godlike points-of-view such as "what if the Empire did X."
:-) Still, as newt says, "assigns agency where there is none." Sorry to beat a
dead horse, but the parallel is fun.

Perhaps more realistic is to envision the legions and the Guard, or some other
sets of entities competing to get priests to have deities endorse their
legitimacy. I know emperors starting with Augustus got priests to deify their
(often adoptive) fathers, thereby styling themselves "Son of God", but I'll
see if I can find some examples of that kind of theolegitimization besides
emperors themselves.

Most Western European political institutions from that day to the 20th century
have been attempts to patch it, eventually accumulating enough patches that it
sometimes worked for a while. Hopefully some of this I'll be blogging about.
Thus I'll hold off on answering this question which you are holding off
asking. :-)

(quote)
Sheriff gets a writ with a syntax error.
Sheriff's Left brain: "I don't have to follow this writ."
Right brain: "The king will be very angry with you if you don't follow this
writ."
Left brain: "But it's a bad writ, and a bad idea."
Right brain: "You don't actually feel that's important right now."
Left brain. "Ah. Well then."
(end quote)

That's a great example. Here are some answers off the top of my head:

(1) Usually with a writ we are talking about a command from one king's officer
to another, often in the king's name, but the king himself is usually above
the fray. Of course it's very useful to ask what happens when the king very
much wants a particular legally dubious outcome.

(2) The sheriff has to figure out whether the king's court will agree with him
that it's a syntax error, because it's that court that decides. So, taking
your concern a step further, we can ask to what extent the judiciary is
independent of coercion from the king. The long answer is complicated, but
mostly they were, because like today's U.S. Supreme Court they served for life
and firing them was highly unusual, it would be a sign of weakness and
lawlessness for the king to fire a justice without very good cause (and after
the Restoration, I'm remembering correctly, it additionally required
impeachment by Commons and Lords).

(3) There were competing courts, with different but often practically
overlapping jurisdictions. For example the king had Chancery (equity), King's
Bench, and Common Pleas (the latter two common law) courts. So they could
sometimes be played against each other to get a fairer deal.
