Last week the default risk on U.S. Treasury bonds doubled. This week it has
increased still more. This risk is measured by credit default swaps (CDS's),
which insure investors against bond defaults. Of course this risk, contrary to
a very stupid but very popular myth among U.S. economists, has never has been
zero: there is no such thing as a "risk-free" investment. Anybody with a
modicum of knowledge of economic history knows (in other words, alas, very few
people know) that over historical timeframes government defaults on their
debt, both overt and covert (through inflation), are common. Indeed over >20
year timeframes even stocks are less risky than government bonds, but for
shorter timeframes bonds are, in nominal terms at least, normally far less
volatile than stocks. Reuters observed,  

> The cost to insure Treasury debt with credit default swaps jumped to 16.5
basis points, or $16,500 per year for five years to insure $10 million in
debt, from 8 basis points on Thursday, an analyst said....Debt protection
costs on U.S. government debt are now higher than those for Germany, which
trades at 9.5 basis points, and are trading at similar levels as Japan and the
United Kingdom, which are around 16.5 basis points, the analyst said.

  
So far this week it has increased to 22 basis points for five years of default
insurance. Bloomberg observes the probable cause of this increased risk:  

> Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson said July 13 the U.S. would seek authority
from Congress to buy unlimited equity in so-called government-sponsored
enterprises Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and to extend them as much credit as
needed. The move effectively put the weight of the treasury behind the
companies, which own or guarantee almost half of the $12 trillion in U.S. home
loans outstanding. The Federal Reserve also agreed to lend directly to Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac.

  
In other words, not only is the Federal Reserve now playing John Law by
printing dollars to buy bad real estate investments, but now the federal
government has declared its willingness to get in on the act in an even bigger
way.  
  
Note that default risks measured by CDS's do _not_ include the risks of what
are effectively ongoing _de facto_ mini-defaults on all dollar-denominated
debt due to inflation, risks that have been rising substantially over the past
ten years, as reflected by the prices of the main insurance against inflation
risk, commodities.  
  
In the U.S. there have been a number of de facto inflationary defaults on U.S.
federal debt -- the Revolutionary War (Continentals), Civil War (Greenbacks),
Great Depression (resetting the gold conversion rate). The largest de facto
default occured in the 1970s (float and inflation) and we are in the midst of
one currently (float and inflation) that may turn out to be even larger. But
the only overt default on "national" governmental debt in our 232-year history
was that of the Confederate States of America in the throes of losing its war
against the (rest of the) U.S.  
  
Compared to the 1970s, oil is responding faster and more completely to Fed
inflation, and oil remains a crucial part of our industries. As a result, the
havoc caused by high oil prices may put a stronger limit this time on how
quickly the Fed shredder can dispose of the real value of U.S. paper. If the
degree covert default is thus limited, but the risk of default increases, the
risk of overt default rises. The market last week seemed to be saying that the
Fed may be starting to approach some such limit, perhaps a political limit due
to hysteria over gas and food prices, on its practical ability to inflate the
U.S. currency. In other words, markets may be saying the Fed cannot necessary
resort to a Weimar- or Zimbabwe-style hyperinflation -- that if federal
financing gets to that extreme U.S. politicians may choose to overtly default
instead.  
  
The city of Vacaville, California recently overtly defaulted on its debt, as
have a number of other municipalities in the U.S. Worldwide overt defaults on
government debt during the second half of the 20th century usually occured in
Third and Second World governments (e.g. Russia in the 1990s), but there were
a large number of overt government defaults in governments of all sorts early
in the Great Depression (indeed these were a leading cause of that economic
disaster), and in prior centuries government defaults wherever governments
borrowed money, including leading nations in Western Europe, were common.
Mature democracies with central banks that can engage in covert defaults
(inflation) have had a far lower rate of overt defaults than other forms of
government or democracies without central banks.  
  
That the risk of _overt_ default has now substantially increased means that
investors are are recognizing that the unprecedented revenue-generating
combination created in 1913 -- IRS (which has been able to reliably collect
$trillions per year) and the Federal Reserve (which has been reliably able to
enage in covert gradual defaults by printing money to buy $trillions worth of
Treasury debt per year) -- is not indestructible. U.S. Treasuries, like every
other investment, have never been risk-free and they've just gotten quite a
bit riskier. Nevertheless compared to historical averages for governments, the
risk of overt default by that powerhouse 1913 duo is pretty low. With very
high probability they will keep paying interest and principal on their debt
while me and my fellow U.S. taxpayers will keep having to shell out
substantial sums to the IRS every year, and see our dollars frittered away
every year, that this dynamic duo may continue to uphold "the good faith and
credit of the United States" while the discreditable activities, often done in
rather poor faith, of the federal government in "redistributing" wealth,
attacking foreign countries in very expensive ways, promising vast pensions
that it cannot pay, promising health care that it cannot fund, and forcing
private businesses to do bizarre things (like take on vast amounts of moral
hazard by lending into "underserved communities", and to actually fund those
government medical mandates) continues.  
  
In related financial news, what I've been predicting for a long time would
happen is starting to happen: the U.S. dollar inflation indices PPI and CPI,
despite being under-reported compared to prior decades (due to a radical
revision of the formulae), are starting to rise to 1970s rates of increase.
Sticky prices in manufactured goods and services, as well as wages (the
stickiest prices of all), are playing a very long-term game of catch-up to
commodity prices, and especially to gold and oil, which are leading indicators
of inflation. I continue to predict 5%-15%/year increases in the CPI and PPI,
and probable "stagflation" (inflation plus recession, which according to
Keynesians is not supposed to happen), until such time as they catch up to the
commodity price increases. Commodity prices themselves, despite their
stratospheric levels, may continue to increase as the Federal Reserve tries to
deal with large government deficits and the fallout from the awful moral
hazard in our housing markets, a moral hazard in no small part due to previous
inflationary policy by the Fed itself combined with the outrageous pressures
from U.S. politicians to relax lending standards in order to get people to buy
houses in "under-served communities" and naive "real estate always goes up"
bubble behavior on the part of the real estate industry and house buyers. The
Fed-and-IRS-backed political franchises Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae have been
moral hazard disasters waiting to happen. Inflation is still by far the
largest problem these federal activities are causing; the doubling of the
overt default risk is just an interesting related blip. My recommendation:
keep only spending money, not savings or long-term investments, in dollars or
dollar-denominated debt, and keep trying to unstick your own wages by
frequently asking your boss for a big raise.  
  
On the increase in Treasury default risk H/T to Alex Tabarrok.

