I've just read a very compelling theory of the origin of life. This pegs my
"that explains so many things!" meter in a very big way. Alkaline vents -- the
tame cousins of black smokers -- were common underneath earth's early oceans,
but were chemically different than today. They were a chemical engineer's
utopia: high temperatures and pressures, iron-sulfur mineral catalysts, a
substantial proton gradient (alkaline vent water to soda-water-like ocean) and
vast amounts of surface area formed by microbubbles. A new theory posits that
Peter Mitchell's revolutionary discovery, proton-gradient manufacture of ATP,
"the energy currency of life", was the original energy source of life, and
that early evolution from primordial nucleic acids to the common ancestors of
archaea, bacteria, and ourselves occurred in these sea-vent microbubbles. A
proton gradient across a membrane simply means that one side is more acidic
(it contains more naked protons) and the other side is more alkaline (it
contains more water molecules missing a proton, called ~~"hydroxyl radicals"~~
hydroxide ions).  
  
Because of Mitchell's discovery we now know that all known life uses membranes
with proton gradients across them to convert energy into ATP molecules.
Wherever the energy comes from -- from light, from carbohydrates stolen from
other organisms (i.e. eating food), wherever -- in every living thing it gets
converted into a proton gradient that then is tapped to manufacture ATP. In
higher animals ATP is made from a proton gradient that is in turn made from
"burning" blood sugar with oxygen, and this ATP powers our muscles and brains.
In plants ATP is central to photosynthesis: light striking chlorophyll
generates a proton gradient, and that proton gradient is used to manufacture
ATP, which in turn is used to make sugars and other plant carbohydrates. In
all life ATP powers the energy-using chemical reactions needed to make
proteins, DNA, and RNA, the complex chemicals of life. (For biochemists
reading this, relax, this is a summary: I've necessarily left out a very large
number of complex steps, many still not fully understood).  
  
The new theory of the origin of life recognizes that proton gradients existed
on a massive scale in alkaline vents. The primordial, carbon-dioxide-rich
oceans were acidic like Coca-Cola: they contained too many protons. These
soda-water oceans were out of balance with the alkaline vent water, which
contained water molecules with protons missing (hydroxide ions). Protons
streamed across this gradient, with the protons from the soda-water ocean
filling up the proton-deficient hydroxide ions to create normal water
molecules. This stream of protons was a massive energy source that could be
tapped to drive vast numbers of energy-consuming chemical reactions. Large
amounts and varieties of chemicals were made on the vast surface areas of the
microbubbles, eventually leading to the immensely complex chemicals and
reaction pathways (metabolisms) that became life.  
  
When, much later, plants evolved, they pulled almost all of the carbon dioxide
out of the air and oceans, converting it into hydrocarbons and oxygen. Then
animals evolved that could breath the oxygen, "burning" it with carbohydrates
from eating the plants. Yet these very different energy sources get converted
by plants and animals alike into the same thing -- proton gradients across
membranes which are used to make ATP, the energy currency of life.  
  
Ironically, we humans by burning fossil fuels are putting a small fraction of
this ancient carbon dioxide which plants removed from the air and oceans back
into the air, where it not only may be causing a bit of global warming, but is
also dissolving back into the oceans and turning them a bit more acidic -- a
tiny step back in the direction of the primordial conditions in which carbon
dioxide concentrations were vastly higher than our puny modern levels, making
the origins of life possible.  
  
The theory's ten-step recipe for life:

> 1\. Water percolated down into newly formed rock under the seafloor, where
it reacted with minerals such as olivine, producing a warm alkaline fluid rich
in hydrogen, sulphides and other chemicals - a process called
serpentinisation.  
>  
> This hot fluid welled up at alkaline hydrothermal vents like those at the
Lost City, a vent system discovered near the Mid-Atlantic Ridge in 2000.  
>  
> 2\. Unlike today's seas, the early ocean was acidic and rich in dissolved
iron. When upwelling hydrothermal fluids reacted with this primordial
seawater, they produced carbonate rocks riddled with tiny pores and a "foam"
of iron-sulphur bubbles.  
>  
> 3\. Inside the iron-sulphur bubbles, hydrogen reacted with carbon dioxide,
forming simple organic molecules such as methane, formate and acetate. Some of
these reactions were catalysed by the iron-sulphur minerals. Similar iron-
sulphur catalysts are still found at the heart of many proteins today.  
>  
> 4\. The electrochemical gradient between the alkaline vent fluid and the
acidic seawater leads to the spontaneous formation of acetyl phosphate and
pyrophospate, which act just like adenosine triphosphate or ATP, the chemical
that powers living cells.  
>  
> These molecules drove the formation of amino acids – the building blocks of
proteins – and nucleotides, the building blocks for RNA and DNA.  
>  
> 5\. Thermal currents and diffusion within the vent pores concentrated larger
molecules like nucleotides, driving the formation of RNA and DNA – and
providing an ideal setting for their evolution into the world of DNA and
proteins. Evolution got under way, with sets of molecules capable of producing
more of themselves starting to dominate.  
>  
> 6\. Fatty molecules coated the iron-sulphur froth and spontaneously formed
cell-like bubbles. Some of these bubbles would have enclosed self-replicating
sets of molecules – the first organic cells. The earliest protocells may have
been elusive entities, though, often dissolving and reforming as they
circulated within the vents.  
>  
> 7\. The evolution of an enzyme called pyrophosphatase, which catalyses the
production of pyrophosphate, allowed the protocells to extract more energy
from the gradient between the alkaline vent fluid and the acidic ocean. This
ancient enzyme is still found in many bacteria and archaea, the first two
branches on the tree of life.  
>  
> 8\. Some protocells started using ATP as well as acetyl phosphate and
pyrophosphate. The production of ATP using energy from the electrochemical
gradient is perfected with the evolution of the enzyme ATP synthase, found
within all life today.  
>  
> 9\. Protocells further from the main vent axis, where the natural
electrochemical gradient is weaker, started to generate their own gradient by
pumping protons across their membranes, using the energy released when carbon
dioxide reacts with hydrogen.  
>  
> This reaction yields only a small amount of energy, not enough to make ATP.
By repeating the reaction and storing the energy in the form of an
electrochemical gradient, however, protocells "saved up" enough energy for ATP
production.  
>  
> 10\. Once protocells could generate their own electrochemical gradient, they
were no longer tied to the vents. Cells left the vents on two separate
occasions, with one exodus giving rise to bacteria and the other to archaea.

More here.  
  
_Dendritic carbonate growths on the Lost City alkaline vent_  
  
Given the vast complexity of the genes and metabolism that would likely have
existed in the common rock-bubble ancestor of archaea and bacteria, I suspect
it will be a long time before all but the simplest of these steps are
recreated in a lab. Still, this is by far the most compelling theory of the
origin of life I've ever seen.  
  
Peter Mitchell, discoverer of the proton-gradient manufacture of ATP, was a
fascinating character: instead of entering the "publish or perish" and "clique
review" rat-race of government-funded science, he dropped out of mainstream
scientific culture and set up his own charitable company (nonprofit in U.S.
lingo), Glyn Research Ltd. His discoveries were compelling enough to win over
the early "he's a wingnut" skeptics and are now the centerpiece of our
understanding of biological energetics. My essay "The Trouble With Science"
suggests why this kind of independence is good for science. Here's more about
Mitchell's theory of proton-powered life called chemiosmosis. The ten-step
process above is the theory of William Martin and Michael Russell, and is an
extension of Gunter Wachterhauser's iron-sulfur world theory.

