 _(Note to readers -- after several months of posting reruns, I am back to
doing original posts until further notice)._  
  
Arnold Kling describes his militaristic theory of the origins of money, and
kindly also quotes and refers readers to my theory (or set of theories, as I
posit that shell proto-money played a crucial role in several different kinds
of hunter-gatherer transactions). Here is the gist of Kling's theory:  
  

> Imagine that you're a warlord leading a band of soldiers. Your business
model is that your soliders prey on farmers, taking plunder and tribute. To
help motivate your soldiers, you promise them a share of the booty. When the
band of warriors is small, the promises can be verbal and informal. However,
in order to organize a large army, you need formal, written contracts. Lacking
lawyers and xerox machines, you make little carvings on metal, hand them out
to soldiers, and say, "After the battle, turn this in to the clerk and we'll
give you a share of captured slaves and grain and stuff."

There may not be as much contrast between our theories as Kling suggests. We
both seem to agree that the traditional economists' explanation of money
emerging from a barter market that otherwise obeyed the principles of
efficient modern markets is not historically sound (although I do believe it
is theoretically and empirically sound as a theory of the way things _can_
happen -- money-like intermediate commodities can and have been observed to
emerge from barter markets). Where we may differ, and perhaps not by much, is
on the role of coercion. I believe that both coercive and voluntary
transactions (and transactions that partook of both components) were
important, and that the voluntary transactions were not efficient market
exchanges:  
  

> Voluntary spot trades are not the only kinds of transactions that benefit
from lower transaction costs. This is the key to understanding the origin and
evolution of money. Family heirlooms could be used as collateral to remove the
credit risk from delayed exchanges. [As explained elswhere in the article,
these were typically exchanges that involved very high transaction costs. I'd
add in clarification now that the closest modern economic model of them would
be bilateral monopoly, not spot exchange on an efficient market]. _The ability
of a victorious tribe to extract tribute from the vanquished was of great
benefit to the victor . The victor's ability to collect tribute benefited from
some of the same kinds of transaction cost techniques as did trade. So did the
plaintiff in assessment of damages for offenses against custom or law_
[emphasis added], and kin groups arranging a marriage. Kin also benefited from
timely and peaceful gifts of wealth by inheritance. The major human life
events that modern cultures segregate from the world of trade benefited no
less than trade, and sometimes more so, from techniques that lowered
transaction costs. None of these techniques was more effective, important, or
early than primitive money -- collectibles.  
> ...  
>  Warfare involved, among other things, killing, maiming, torture,
kidnapping, rape, and the extortion of tribute in exchange for avoiding such
fates. When two neighbor tribes were not at war, one was usually paying
tribute to the other. Tribute could also serve to bind alliances, achieving
economies of scale in warfare. Mostly, it was a form of exploitation more
lucrative to the victor than further violence against the defeated.  
>  
> Victory in war was sometimes followed by an immediate payment from the
losers to the victims. Often this just took the form of looting by the
enthusiastic victors, while the losers desperately hid their collectibles.
More often, tribute was demanded on a regular basis. In this case, the triple
coincidence could and sometimes was avoided by a sophisticated schedule of
payments in kind that matched the losing tribe's ability to supply a good or
service with the victor's demand for it. However, even with this solution
primitive money could provide a better way -- a common medium of value that
greatly simplified the terms of payment – very important in an era when terms
of the treaty could not be recorded but had to be memorized. In some cases, as
with the wampum as used in the Iriquois Confederacy, the collectibles doubled
as a primitive mnemonic device that, while not verbatim, could be used as an
aid to recall the terms of the treaty. For the winners, collectibles provided
a way to collect tribute at closer to the Laffer optimum. For the losers,
collectibles buried in caches provided a way to “under-report”, leading the
victors to believe the losers were less wealthy and thus demand less than they
might. Caches of collectibles also provided insurance against over-zealous
tribute collectors. Much of the wealth in primitive societies escaped the
notice of the missionaries and anthropologists due to its highly secretive
nature. Only archeology can reveal the existence of this hidden wealth.  
>  
> Hiding and other strategies presented a problem that tribute collectors
share with modern tax collectors – how to estimate the amount of wealth they
can extract. Value measurement is a thorny problem in many kinds of
transactions, but never more so than in the antagonistic collection of tax or
tribute. In making these very difficult and nonintuitive trade-offs, and then
executing them in a series of queries, audits, and collection actions, tribute
collectors efficiently optimized their revenue, even if the results seemed
quite wasteful to the tribute payer.  
>  
> Imagine a tribe collecting tribute from several neighbor tribes it
previously defeated in war. It must estimate how much it can extract from each
tribe. Bad estimates leave the wealth of some tribes understated, while
forcing others to pay tribute based on estimates of wealth they don't actually
have. The result: the tribes that are hurt tend to shrink. The tribes that
benefit pay less tribute than could be extracted. In both cases, less revenue
is generated for the victors than they might be able to get with better rules.
This is an application of the Laffer curve to the fortunes of specific tribes.
On this curve, applied to income taxes by the brilliant economist Arthur
Laffer, as the tax rate increases, the amount of revenue increases, but at an
increasingly slower rate than the tax rate, due to increased avoidance,
evasion, and most of all disincentive to engage in the taxed activity. At a
certain rate due to these reasons tax revenues are optimized. Hiking the tax
rate beyond the Laffer optimum results in lower rather than higher revenues
for the government.

We do seem to differ in that Kling's account is basically an account of the
origins of coinage in the agricultural era, and mine is an account of the
origins of shell proto-money in the hunter-gatherer era. As indicated above, I
believe both coercion and voluntary transactions (and admixtures of same)
played an important role in the hunter-gatherer era, and as a general matter
that's also true of the agricultural era.  
  
I have very little disagreement with Kling's account of the importance of
coercion in the origin of coinage. Indeed, here's what I had to say about the
origins of coinage:

> Given what we have seen about the benefits of proto-money to tribute and tax
collectors, as well as the critical nature of the value measurement problem in
optimally coercing such payments, it is not surprising that tax collectors,
specifically the kings of Lydia, were the first major issuers of coinage. The
king, deriving his revenue from tax collection, had a strong incentive to
measure to value of wealth held and exchanged by his subjects more accurately.
That the exchange also benefited from cheaper measurement by traders of the
medium of exchange, creating something closer to efficient markets, and
allowing individuals to enter into the marketplace on a larger scale for the
first time, was for the king a fortuitous side effect.

My account of coinage differs from Kling only in that I'm looking at the
measurement problem that occurs when collecting the plunder; he is looking at
the measurement problem that occurs when distributing the plunder out to the
soldiers. Both are important. Indeed I have also discussed the latter before
on this blog (I don't recall the origins of the idea -- I may have read it
somewhere -- a bleg to my kind readers, if you know of a reference, please
post it in the comments):  
  

> Markets will tend to standardize on whatever the dominant transactor, the
party that controls the largest plurality of cash flow, standardizes on, and
in most historical societies the dominant transactions were tax collection and
the payment of those taxes to soldiers.

By "dominant" here I just mean constituting the plurality (the largest
player), not the majority of the value of all transactions, whether coercive
or voluntary or some admixture of same. Coinage made measuring the value of
both plunder and the distribution of plunder more accurate: both were
important in increasing the efficiency of plunder and giving rise to coinage.
More efficient exchanges, resembling more spot exchanges than bilateral
monopoliies, and thus a larger tax base, were a fortuitous consequence for the
Lydian kings (and later for the Greeks who eventually conquered the relatively
coinless Persians).  
  
The issue of coercion is also deeply implicated in the origins of agriculture
itself. After all, hunter-gatherers were expert botanists compared to the
modern layman. They were perfectly well aware that one could plant seeds (and
shoots, for asexual reproduction) and have them grow, and could have easily
learned the basic techniques associated with early agriculture once they had
experimented with this knowledge. Yet these expert botanists with brains the
same size as ours existed for 100,000 years before the agricultural
breakthrough occured. The problem was not one of farming technique, it was one
of securing this capital investment from fellow tribe members and foreign
tribes. Only once this problem in coercion and transaction costs was solved
could agricultural society appear. More here and here.

