Kevembuangga,  
  
Thoughtful comments as usual. I haven't heard of Joseph Tainter, thanks for
the ref I'll take a look at his stuff. Per your points:  
  
(1) waste disposal problems that are prerequisites for the existence of
civilization are easy. Only a few such problems that are luxuries are actually
hard, with the possible exception of CO2 emissions in the long term.  
  
(2) as for energy resources, see my link above to my essay "Mining the Vasty
Deep". We have barely scratched the surface of this billiard ball we live on.
Also, I suspect the main barrier to cheap nuclear energy are the severe
regulations of spoiled rich countries, which puts it along with physical
frontiers in the category of things that will be exploited by poor-but-smart
people while the wealthy-but-stupid keep trying to regulate it out of
existence. So if the BRICs countries reduce the growth of their CO2 outputs
(which I don't expect them to do) they can fairly easily switch to nuclear
energy over the next 50 years. Only the wealth-but-stupid countries that
regulate all the very good but dirty sources of energy (oil, coal, nuclear)
into oblivion are screwed unless solar becomes economical (which is possible)
or there is some breakthrough in fusion.  
  
The only possible exception to (1) above is CO2 emissions, which I consider a
long-term not a short-term problem, for various reasons too tedious to fit
into a comment (and I'm not a climate expert, but my comments on the
unadmitted complexity and poor incentives of much of modern "science" probably
apply there too).  
  
If, highly improbably, energy prices in terms of gold quadruple over the long
term, we'll have to return to an economy similar to that of about 1920 (or
China just two decades ago) with most transportation by bicycle and having to
get much more out of much smaller IC engines. But gasoline would have to get
over an order of magnitude more expensive before we'd have to go back to
horses, bicycles, steam and sails, but even that is doable. We had a very
advanced civilization in 1870 based on horses, steam and sail. It would be
awful -- we'd consider it a very stinky and poverty-ridden way to live compare
to today -- but it wouldn't be a threat to civilization. But all that is
extremely unlikely, as gasoline prices even doubling in terms of gold over the
next thirty years, absent draconian regulations or taxes, is improbable. The
much more likely outcome is that, given a fair and free market, the prices of
gasoline and near substitutes (e.g. methanol) will fall significantly over the
next 50 years (conditional on absence of draconian regulations/taxes).  
  
Murat, I'm not sure I fully understand your proposal but the part that makes
sense sounds similar to a proposal I made to combine tipping with social
network rating schemes like Digg/Reddit and "Like" buttons. The main barrier
to easy payments is mental transaction costs:  
  
http://szabo.best.vwh.net/micropayments.html  
  
People don't want to have to keep track of lots of tiny donations, they want
to make a handful of large ones and then get on with the rest of their lives.  
  
How about an online organization of like-minded people that consists of two
classes: (1) raters and (2) philanthropists. The philanthropists donate based
on how the raters vote (i.e. on what they "Like"), similar to the idea of
grant-matching. Only the top vote-getters get anything at all, but that a
sizable amount. This saves philanthropists effort since they use like-minded
friends to do their selecting for them. The main drawback I can see is that
voting is so cheap it doesn't have same commitment signal that fellow
philanthropist's donations do in grant-matching. But it may be sufficient if
restricted to like-minded friends.

