Anonymous, that's a great point, that bribery increases the representation
distance. (I used that phrase in my paper on the Non-Delegation Doctrine here.
That paper also describes some of the philosophy behind the structure of the
U.S. Constitution, such as the separation of powers.)  
  
Representation distance, as I recall, is the degree to which the represenative
actually represents the interests (basically equivalent to economic
preferences, but they might also include preferences to coerce others via
government) of his constituents rather than others. One can think of a this
distance as being minimal, call it 1, when a person is acting for himself.
When one principal delegates duties to one carefully chosen and monitored
agent (a.k.a. representative), the distance is some greater value, perhaps 2.
Representation distance is further compromised by majority vote, which leads
to two losses: (1) the interests become increasingly general and vague, rather
than the specific and concrete interests the voters actually have, as the
number of voters increase and (2) the interests of minorities tend to be
neglected.  
  
The larger the number of voters, the longer the representation distance. This
distance may be proportional to the number of voters, in which case the
representation distance of a U.S. Congressional election on our scale is about
6 million.  
  
There may also be efficiency measures proportional to this distance. For
example, the efficiency of investment in public goods (where the "public" is
just the population of voters) may be logarithmic in the number of voters. On
the other hand, larger representation distance may have a good effect in
decreasing the ability of majorities to oppress minorities in specific ways.
(However money everybody understands at every distance). These are just
theories I'm throwing out off the top of my head, but representation distance
does give a way to reason about public choice problems.  
  
The representation distance to executive and independent agencies is much
shorter if you're a lobbyist. K Street is a far more effective representative
institution than large democratic elections. It is, perhaps, not too different
than the aristocracy the federalists Framers were dreaming of, albeit on a far
vaster and more intrusive scale.  
  
Many anti-federalists argued that a large republic could not work because of
what I am calling the representation distance. The vast majority of republics
in history had been quite small, often little more than a large town or city.
A few large republics had existed previously, but they had been aristocratic
in nature (Rome, Venice, Genoa, etc.) The federalists were, generally
speaking, aristocrats, and it was OK by them if the U.S. ended up
aristocratic. Instead we ended up with a party system and a weird politics
where political debates are are conducted over very abstract philosophies,
slogans, broad economic classes, races, and ethnic groups. These groups
compete to allocate "public goods" to serve their perceived broad interests,
to "redistribute" property from the other groups, and to guilt people in other
groups to allow such redistribution. In historical terms, the United States
and other modern "democracies" are very weird indeed.  
  
michael, you're write. I'd also point to the Genovese where were great
innovators in contracts. For example they invented modern marine insurance,
unbundled from other kinds of contracts, and reinsurance (most familiar as the
Lloyd's Names system).  
  
George, unpredictable elections certainly do not solve the entire corruption
problem. Indeed, most of the operational bias occurs on K Street, the direct
lobbying of unelected bureaucrats rather than of elected officials.
Nevertheless, elections are an important part of many institutions, including
commercial corporations, so the unpredictable election techniques could have a
wide impact. And that's a good point about lotteries not having the bias of
voting in selecting for power-hungry types.

