Great comments from everybody, thanks.  
  
"Objective" is often used to mean "intersubjective." For example, in law "the
reasonable person standard" is what a reasonable person would do in a given
situation. In practice what is "reasonable" is generally decided by a jury, so
it is some consensus of the 12 very subjective opinions of the jurors.
However, the law calls this an "objective" standard. Only when referring to a
particular person's state of mind (e.g. proving "intent" for a crime)is it
called "subjective."  
  
Of course this is qualitatively different from "objective" in the sense of,
say, a law of physics or judging time by the movements of the stars. So I
agree so far that "intersubjective" would have been a better term.  
  
However, there's another way costs are usually far more "objective" than many
other kinds of value estimates: they are easy to verify. If A paid $X to B for
a Widget, and A and B both recorded the transaction in their books, then
(short of collusion between A and B to spoof the auditor) the auditor can
verify the transaction actually took place. So we have some good evidence that
a Widget is worth $X. (Or as Mike says, cost is historical rather than
hypothetical).  
  
Of course, cost is merely another proxy measure, not the value itself. But
because of its auditability, it is usually the best proxy measure for most
purposes, IMHO.  
  
Some economists have mixed up costs that make good proxy measures (e.g. labor
costs) with actual value in economic theories, and that certainly is a big
mistake to be avoided.  
  
Actual opportunity costs are very hard to measure, but at least for labor we
have a good proxy measure of opportunity costs -- time. This is why paying
somebody per hour (or per month while noticing how often a worker is around
the office) is so very common. It's far cheapr to measure time, thus
estimating the worker's opportunity costs, than actual value of output. (I
discuss this more in my paper "A Measure of Sacrifice.")  
  
Much of the advance of civilization has consisted in finding proxies that
allow us to estimate with more accuracy and integrity more kinds of value.

