In today's decision in _MedImmune v. Genentech_ , the U.S. Supreme Court held
that (possibly subject to a caveat described below) a patent licensee can sue
to get out of the license without having to infringe the patent first. In
other words, the licensee can sue without stopping the license payments. This
sounds like some minor procedural point. It is a procedural point but it is
hardly minor. It dramatically changes the risks of infringement and
invalidity, and on whom those risks are placed, in a licensing relationship.  
  
The Court's opinion today reverses the doctrine of the Federal Circuit, the
normal appeals court for U.S. patents, that had held that there was no
standing for a patent licensee to sue until it had actually infringed the
patent or breached the contract. This meant that the licensee had to risk
triple damages (for intentional infringement) and other potential problems in
order to have a court determine whether the patent was valid or being
infringed. This could be harsh, and it has long been argued that such
consequences coerce licensees into continuing to pay license fees for products
that it has discovered are not really covered by the patent.  
  
Given the fuzziness of the "metes and bounds" of patents, this is a common
occurrence. Sometimes the licensee's engineers come up with an alternative
design that seems to avoid the patent, but the licensee is too scared of
triple damages if the court decides otherwise and sticks with the patented
product and paying the license fees. At other times new prior art is
discovered or some other research uncovers the probable invalidity of the
patent. But enough uncertainty remains that , given the threat of triple
damages, the licensee just keeps paying the license fees.  
  
A caveat is that the licensor may have to first "threaten" the licensee
somehow that they will take action if the licensee doesn't make the expected
payments or introduces a new product not covered by the license. In this case
that "threat" took the form of an opinion letter from the licensor that the
licensee's new product was covered by the old patent, and thus that the
licensee had to pay license fees for the new product  
  
Justice Scalia wrote the opinion for the eight justice majority. He argued
that if the only difference between a justiciable controversy (i.e. a case
where the plaintiff has standing under "case or controversy" clause of the U.S
Constitution) and a non-justiciable one (i.e. no standing to sue) is that the
plaintiff chose not to violate the disputed law, then the plaintiff still has
standing:  
  

> The plaintiff's own action (or inaction) in failing to violate the law
eliminates the imminent threat of prosecution, but nonetheless does not
eliminate Article III jurisdiction. For example, in _Terrace v. Thompson_ ,
263 U. S. 197 (1923), the State threatened the plaintiff with forfeiture of
his farm, fines, and penalties if he entered into a lease with an alien in
violation of the State's anti-alien land law. Given this genuine threat of
enforcement, we did not require, as a prerequisite to testing the validity of
the law in a suit for injunction, that the plaintiff bet the farm, so to
speak, by taking the violative action.

  
One of the main purposes of the Declaratory Judgments Act, under which such
lawsuits are brought, is to avoid the necessity of committing an illegal act
before the case can be brought to court:  
  

> Likewise, in _Steffel v. Thompson_ , 415 U. S. 452 (1974), we did not
require the plaintiff to proceed to distribute handbills and risk actual
prosecution before he could seek a declaratory judgment regarding the
constitutionality of a state statute prohibiting such distribution. Id., at
458, 460. As then-Justice Rehnquist put it in his concurrence, "the
declaratory judgment procedure is an alternative to pursuit of the arguably
illegal activity." Id., at 480. In each of these cases, the plaintiff had
eliminated the imminent threat of harm by simply not doing what he claimed the
right to do (enter into a lease, or distribute handbills at the shopping
center). That did not preclude subject matter jurisdiction because the threat-
eliminating behavior was effectively coerced. See _Terrace_ , supra, at 215.
216; Steffel, supra, at 459. The dilemma posed by that coercion "putting the
challenger to the choice between abandoning his rights or risking prosecution"
is "a dilemma that it was the very purpose of the Declaratory Judgment Act to
ameliorate." _Abbott Laboratories v.  
>  Gardner_, 387 U. S. 136, 152 (1967).

  
Scalia, who is normally no fan of easy standing, extended this doctrine from
disputes with the government to private disputes. For this he used as
precedent _Altvater v. Freeman_ :  
  

> The Federal Circuit's _Gen-Probe_ decision [the case in which the Federal
Circuit established its doctrine which the Supreme Court today reversed]
distinguished _Altvater_ on the ground that it involved the compulsion of an
injunction. But _Altvater_ cannot be so readily dismissed. Never mind that the
injunction had been privately obtained and was ultimately within the control
of  
>  the patentees, who could permit its modification. More fundamentally, and
contrary to the Federal Circuit's conclusion, _Altvater_ did not say that the
coercion dispositive of the case was governmental, but suggested just the
opposite. The opinion acknowledged that the licensees had the option of
stopping payments in defiance of the injunction, but explained that the
consequence of doing so would be to risk "actual [and] treble damages in
infringement suits" by the patentees. 319 U. S., at 365. It significantly did
not mention the threat of prosecution for contempt, or any other sort of
governmental sanction.

  
Scalia as usual got to the point:  
  

> The rule that a plaintiff must destroy a large building, bet the farm, or(as
here) risk treble damages and the loss of 80 percent of its business, before
seeking a declaration of its actively contested legal rights finds no support
in Article III.

  
Scalia rebutted the argument that under freedom of contract the parties had a
right to, and had here, created an "insurance policy" immunizing the licensor
from declaratory lawsuits:  
  

> Promising to pay royalties on patents that have not been held invalid does
not amount to a promise not to seek a holding of their invalidity.

  
The lessons of this case also apply to copyright and other kinds of IP, albeit
in different ways. In copyright one can be exposed to criminal sanctions for
infringement so there is an even stronger case for declaratory lawsuits.  
  
The most interesting issue is to what extent IP licensors will be able to
"contract around" this holding and thus still be able to immunize themselves
from pre-infringement lawsuits. It's possible that IP licensors will still be
able to prevent their licensees from suing with the proper contractual
language. Licensees on the other hand may want to insist on language that
preserves their rights to sue for declaratory judgments on whether the IP they
are licensing is valid or on whether they are really infringing it with
activities for which they wish to not pay license fees. If there's interest,
I'll post in the future if I see good ideas for such language, and if I have
some good ideas of my own I'll post those. This will be a big topic among IP
license lawyers for the foreseeable future, as Scalia's opinion left a raft of
issues wide open, including the issues about how such language would now be
interpreted.  
  
I will later update this post with links to the opinions (I have them via
e-mail from Professor Hal Wegner).  
  
UPDATE: Straight from the horse's mouth, here is the slip opinion.

