  
The EPA has an interesting report on the cap-and-trade programs for acid rain
pollutants. These markets have led to dramatic reductions in the pollutants
while costing industry (and therefore consumers) relatively little. This is
reflected by the fact that electricity prices have also fallen since the
advent of the acid rain pollution markets. Anybody who is serious about
reduction of large-scale pollution from large sources sees cap and trade as
the leading method of reduction. The program has been so successful the EPA
has been able to set new ambitious goals of reducing sulfates by a further 70%
and nitrates by a further 60% without serious objection from Republicans.  
  
The next big challenge is carbon dioxide, the probable main cause of global
warming. The European Union Emission Trading Scheme is the first stab at this.
According to critics the European authority has given away too many
grandfathered credits and bought too few back, causing the price to decline
too far and, allegedly, too few actual emissions reductions to be implemented.
While emission markets themselves work remarkably well, where the actual cap
of emissions should be set remains a political hot button. Fortunately, the
pollution market also makes it far easier to far more accurately estimate
cost-benefit ratios, thus greatly informing the political debate.  
  
Besides the cap level, the most interesting debate is over auctions versus
grandfathering for allocating the initial rights. While the U.S. acid rain
market achieved great results with grandfathering the initial credits, it's
probable that emissions markets would work even better by auctioning off the
inititial credits rather than giving them away based on current emissions.
Grandfathering creates an incentive for polluters to increase their emissions
in the years befor the grandfathering levels are determined. On the other
hand, there's an argument to be made that current emitters have by their legal
operations developed prescriptive rights to their current levels of emissions,
and the acid rain markets have demonstrated that grandfathering works.  
  
The U.S. market also shows that it takes some time to develop these market
institutions. An initial dry-run period which focuses more on developing the
market and monitoring institutions rather than steep carbon dioxide reductions
is probably a good idea. Once the institutions have evolved into an efficient
form dramatic reductions in carbon dioxide emissions from large sources will
likely be possible, as indicated by the EPA now being able target dramatic
reductions after a decade of acid rain emissions trading.  
  
The third interesting issue is whether to include third party carbon dioxide
sinks in the market. This would be a novelty not yet tried in other pollution
markets, but it makes quite a bit of sense since we don't really know yet
whether emissions reduction or creating carbon dioxide sinks is the better
strategy for carbon dioxide reduction. The market should motivate both
solutions. But measuring the amount of carbon dioxide sunk, and determining
for how long a period into the future it must be sunk for, are among the novel
issues to be addressed.  
  
The fourth issue, crucial to getting carbon dioxide markets to actually cut
back the rising global emissions, is to extend them to other developed
countries and, most challenging of all, to developing countries.  
  

