I stand corrected on 1970s inflation figures. My personal memory is that it
was far larger than that. Obviously the numbers have been corrected behind my
back some time between then and now. :-) Probably my memory overemphasizes
gold, which went from $35 to a peak of over $800 in 1980, and oil, which went
from around $3 to a peak of over $40 in 1980. These reflect expectations that
inflation would remain high after the 1970s, which didn't pan out (or, if your
theory emphasizing irrationality is correct, the sheer over-reputation of gold
and oil over stocks based on recent price history). The CPI growth is of
course larger if we tack on ten more years. 1965-1985 the CPI grew 338%
whereas S&P 500 earnings grew only a bit less, 296%. I must conclude that
stock earnings basically kept up with inflation during the main period of
recent historical inflation. We are probably starting to run another
experiment. :-(  
  
Since irrationality leaves us waving our arms unfalsifiably, I remain, perhaps
like a drunk searching for a lost item under the lamp-post, searching for
explanations for prices based largely on rationality and high uncertainty.  
  
 _[A hypo which I'm afraid is extraordinarily utopian: free banking + taxes
abolished]  
  
Would the market settle on one particular collectible to use as a store of
value (say gold) and would this collectible absorb 95+% of the demand for
collectibles? Or would the the collectible premium remain spread across
various goods (stocks, silver, housing, etc.)?_  
  
To conserve transaction costs for the medium of exchange (especially to
minimize the problem of multiple currencies creating multiple prices for the
retail customer), markets would probably settle for redemption windows on
either gold or a particular commodity basket ETF or some combination of a
variety of ETFs. (There may be ways to reduce retail transaction costs
sufficiently, and this would incidentally greatly help new entrants in
currency markets get established. On this I refer readers to my old article
describing a generalized system of financial contract "translation").  
  
In terms of just stores of value, i.e. investments, transaction costs are so
low that the value of diversification between different stores of value with
different kinds of risks far outweighs the transaction costs of keeping track
of these different investments for all but the smallest of investors.
Investments would remain diversified. Since long-term inflation expectations
would go way down (replaced by the old regime of inflations and deflations
which mostly balance out through a business cycle, if free banking remains
competitive) the collectible premiums on all investments would go way down,
except perhaps (more below) those of the commodity(s) in which the currencies
are redeemed. Investment demand would shift towards flow demand and away from
collectible demand. Artwork would be put in warehouses to rot and venture
capital would boom.  
  
Even if we need one medium of exchange (currency) standard for transaction
cost reasons, a single standard does not necessarily mean one store of value
with a high collectible premium. If the basket of investments in the standard
is sufficiently diverse -- let's say it includes a real estate basket ETF, a
stock index ETF, a commodity basket ETF, and a small fraction of precious
metals -- the collectible premium in any one of these stores of value would be
small (and gold prices would dramatically fall). The ETFs seem to solve the
problem of a clear contractual definition of the basket.  
  
Two other ways we might reduce the collectible premium: (1) as above, reduce
medium of exchange transaction costs to the point where many standards can
coexist. (2) If for some reasons, e.g. better auditing and less leverage than
during the previous free banking era, overall trust rises to the point where
redemptions across the entire business cycle greatly fall, the collectible
premium for the backing commmodity(s) also could greatly fall.

