Intriguingly, while Adam Smith et. al. have, as I described in the linked
article above, long observed the big wins from specialization in the general
economy, one can demonstrate this specifically for the Hutter's AIXI model of
"general intelligence" or "universal algorithmic intelligence" of which
Singulatarians are fond. Hutter's model is basically just algorithmic
probability and Solomonoff induction which I describe here. As Kevembuangga
states this is uncomputable: there is in fact no way to guarantee a computer
will find the best answer to any given problem, the best model to describe or
predict any given environment, and the like.  
  
Furthermore, even Hutter's time-bounded version of AIXI, which is not
guaranteed to find the best answer, requires a time exponential in the size of
the analyzed environment to run. By comparison, cracking public-key
cryptography takes less time: it's only "super-polynomial" (slower than
polynomial but faster than exponential) in the size of the key. Most practical
algorithms run in logarithmic time (i.e. doubly exponentially faster than
"universal AI"), polynomial time (exponentially faster than "universal AI"),
or similar.  
  
And the most practical machine learning techniques, such as evolutionary
algorithms, which Singulatarians love to decry as "specialized", since they
don't actually produce anything close to human-like intelligence, take
advantage of probablism, keeping the best prior answers around, etc. to often
get a "good" model of the environment or solution to a problem early in its
run. Their performance follows the well-known logarithmic learning curve, i.e.
it gets exponentially harder to proceed as one approaches the best answer, so
evolutionary algorithms and most other machine learning techniques tend to
only work well where "low-hanging fruit", such as readily learned patterns,
exist in the environment and are sufficient to solve one's problem (and, as
stated above, where environments are easily simulable, which is the hard
part).  
  
Thus, in the general AIXI case of Kolmogorov/Solomonoff/Hutter, where the
probability distribution of the environment is unknown, there is no guarantee
one can find an answer and even where there is no guaranteed answer analyzing
the environment requires an infeasibly large amount of time. When one knows
some useful things a priori about _particular_ environments, i.e. when
intelligence is _specialized_ , computations that learn things about or solve
problems within that environment can often be exponentially or doubly-
exponentially more efficient. Thus computation theory proves for intelligence
what Smith, Hayek, Reed, et. al. observed about economies: specialization and
the distribution of knowledge brings huge advantages.

