Mencius Moldbug repeats a currently popular quote from Thomas Jefferson:  

> As Jefferson said (in 1820): "To consider the judges as the ultimate
arbiters of all constitutional questions [is] a very dangerous doctrine
indeed, and one which would place us under the despotism of an oligarchy. Our
judges are as honest as other men, and not more so. They have, with others,
the same passions for party, for power, and the privilege of their corps.
Their maxim is 'boni judicis est ainpliare jurisdictionem,' and their power
the more dangerous as they are in once for life."

Jefferson was like almost all Whigs (the philosophy, not the parties) overly
enamored of the legislative branch. (Bagehot's sovereignty of Parliament was
the end point of this trend). Supreme Court tenure is the closest thing we
have to political property rights and the resulting long time horizons in this
country. It is also, at the risk of sounding parochial, a group of highly
trained and experienced professionals. Would you rather have experienced
software engineers writing -- or at least reviewing -- the code that runs on
your computer, or bunch of frat boys who happen to speak smoothly and look
good on TV?  
  
With the possible exception of the independent agencies, the federal judiciary
is the only branch with anything resembling long term political preferences.
This is reflected, for example, in the very high quality and care put into
their opinions, compared to the typical ideological quackery and other
ignorant nonsense that generally passes for political debate in the Congress
and the mass media and beyond.  
  
The Court, it is true, has like the executive and legislative branches
eventually succumbed to every long-term political trend. But it has severely
attenuated many of the political fads most dangerous to liberty.  
  
The current popularity (and abuse) of this Jefferson quote stems from a
propaganda movement Jefferson would have abhorred: to invest our executive
branch with arbitrary powers to act unchecked by our Constitution. The hot air
in this whole debate about "who decides what is constitutional" also reflects
the general ignorance about how separation of powers works.  
  
To summarize separation of powers in one sentence: it is a formal system of
mutual veto. Under our corporate charter here in the U.S., our Constitution,
Congress gets a full veto at will because it must originate legislation. The
President gets a partial veto at will. The Supreme Court's veto by contrast
can only be of a very specific and careful kind. It only gets to decide what
it _has_ to decide when asked to decide a case in the face of conflicting
laws. It must decide whether a statute conflicts with our corporate charter,
the Constitution. In such cases the charter must prevail. Articles of
incorporation trump by-laws. And it must justify such a ruling in a legally
professional opinion.  
  
Nothing at all stops the Congress or the President from vetoing legislation
because they believe it to be unconstitutional, and indeed this was quite
normal in the first century of our Republic to have long debates about the
meaning of the Constitution in the halls of Congress. This was long a habit,
up to the 20th century, until Progressive legislators decided they didn't much
understand or care for that archaic charter. Even Congressional supporters of
constitutionalism rhetorically shifted the Reform-and-Jingo media flack they
got from arguing that a desired law violates our charter to the relatively
immune Court. (This was recently reflected in Senator Spector voting for the
Military Commissions Act despite expressing his belief that it was
unconstitutional -- the Court will take care of that, he said).  
  
It is profoundly unfortunate that two branches have abdicated their
responsibilities to our Charter, but the solution is hardly to strip the
responsibility from the only remaining branch that still to some extent
exercises it. What is most extremely dangerous to liberty for the executive to
do is ignore such a Court opinion and proceed to execute a law that the Court
has carefully explained violates our Constitution. This has happened to a
disturbingly large degree in the current Bush Administration, for example with
its warrantless NSA mass-surveillance pgoram. It most recently and famously
occurred at a local level, where the Los Angeles County Sheriff released media
celebrity Paris Hilton from jail in violation of her judicial sentence. She
had been punished by the judge according to law for her repeated breaking of
drunk driving and probation laws. This is one sheriff who should himself face
some jailtime if we still live under "the rule of law, rather than of men," as
the founders of our country intended.  
  
This kind of arbitrary executive power, but of a ubiquitous nature rather than
as a temporary response to national emergency or the quirk of a celebrity-
worshipping (or bribed?) sheriff, is what the current criticisms of the Court,
if they prevail, will result in. This outcome would destroy one of the few
remaining controls against arbitrary power we have left.

