 _If the SzaboNote (and its imitators) won over the market, it would absorb
nearly all collectible demand. So if you could add up all world current
collectible demand, measure it as a ratio of total world paper wealth, I think
you would get the collectible premium of SzaboNote._  
  
If we include in collectible demand the demand as a store of value, i.e. an
investment, the SzaboNote will take up only a small, and perhaps extremely
small, fraction of that demand.  
  
Nobody has a perfect credit rating, not even my bank. There will still be
plenty of other investments that are better than holding my currency (indeed,
my basket is not optimized as an investment for a particular investor, it is
optimized as a very low-risk and liquid investments. Particular investors will
want to hold something else when they don't need SzaboNotes). Since
transaction costs are zero (except here for the risks of bank failure) I
include with that assumption that SzaboNotes or any other currency need only
be held an infinitesimal amount of time. All other times, people hold their
standard investment portfolio and (since transaction costs are zero) get
SzaboBucks only in the instant they are needed to complete a payment. (A
subset of investments, of course, are debts denominated in SzaboNotes, but I
don't think that automatically translates into a collectible premium for
SzaboNotes if they are only held for an instant).  
  
(We are probably defining transaction costs very differently -- my definition
seems to be much broader than yours, see next note. This technical term in
economics is admittedly rather misleading -- it includes far more than just
costs analogous to broker's fees -- it includes things like risks, costs of
obtaining information, etc. -- it basically includes every kind of cost that
is not otherwise explicitly broken out -- I think our discussion would benefit
from discovering our cost assumptions and breaking them out).  
  
Thus, if SzaboNotes need be held only an instantaneous period of time, in
themselves they don't need any collectible premium at all. (In reality, the
only collectible premium is that generated from my bank investing its reserves
in the basket). It is only debt denominated in SzaboNotes that has collectible
value based in part on the credibility of that currency.  
  
Under purely zero transaction costs (and here we admittedly get even more
silly, but zero transaction cost assumptions often have that effect) SzaboBank
is so reliable that it doesn't need to hold significant reserves, so that the
collectible premium generated by its operations is zero.  
  
 _The Szabo note presents other difficulties Someone needs to manage the index
and define the terms underwhich new stocks are added. Any stock that is added
recieves a huge bounce as it gets the 30% collectible premium_  
  
I suspect the collectible premium will be much lower (and at the imaginary
level of zero transaction costs, under my broad definition of that phrase, it
is zero).

