Today was the probably biggest day in patent law since the passage of the 1952
Patent Act. By a unanimous (9-0) vote, the U.S. Supreme Court overruled
decades of Federal Circuit holdings in the most controversial area of patent
law, obviousness. And by a 7-1 vote, it ringingly re-affirmed the doctrine
that U.S. legal language should be construed to not encroach on foreign
jurisdictions unless it expressly does so -- implicitly criticizing the
Federal Circuit's failure to respect foreign patent jurisdictions and
reversing it outright in the area of software export.  
  
You'd think that engineers, who make the vast majority of inventions, would be
the most enthusiastic supporters of our patent system. But most engineers find
our patent system problematic, and by far their greatest objection is the
plague of trivial patents. This is largely governed by the statutory language
forbidding "obvious" patents. This is a notoriously ambiguous word that gives
rise to a notoriously subjective area of law. In an effort to provide clarity,
the Federal Circuit in recent decades went beyond old Supreme Court precedent
and set up a requirement that the patent challenger must show a "teaching,
motivation, or suggestion" in the prior art to combine the patent claim's
elements in order to show that a patent claim was obvious. It was not enough
that common sense or the vast majority of engineers in the field found the
patent to be trivial. The Federal Circuit's doctrine thus gave rise to a a
flood of trival patents in exchange for achieving some objectivity and
clarity. Today in _KSR v. Teleflex_ , the Court rejected this tradeoff and
argued that subjectivity ("common sense") should also be used to find patents
obvious -- that the Federal Circuit's "teaching, suggestion, or motivation"
requirement was far too strict. Instead, the Court held that common sense
arguments could be made.  
  
The Court also specifically held in _KSR_ that instead of just looking at
obviousness in the context of the problem the problem the patentee was trying
to solve, "any need or problem known in the field or endeavor at the time of
invention and addressed by the patent can provide a reason for combining the
elements in the manner claimed." This provides a much needed expansion of the
power to prove a patent obvious without decreasing the clarity or objectivity
of the test. Along the same lines, the relevant prior art need not solve the
same kind of problem -- the obviousness analysis should include elements from
prior art even where that art solved different problems from those addressed
by the current patent. Whether the changes to the prior art produce result
that could be predicted by your typical engineer in the field (in patent
parlance, a "person of ordinary skill in the art" or POSITA) is also strongly
relevant -- if the function that results from changing or combining elements
from the prior art is predictable by our POSITA, given what is already known
about how those elements work individually, the claimed change to or
combination of those elements is probably obvious. Unlike the "common sense"
approach, the any-purpose and predictable-function tests are quite objective
and clear, and I hope the Federal Circuit strongly and fully adheres to them
in future obviousness cases.  
  
I'm proud to observe that two of the professors whose patent classes I enjoyed
the most, Professor Robert Brauneis and Professor John Duffy, helped KSR make
its case for a broader and stronger obviousness standard that should become
one of the strongest precedents ever set in U.S. patent law.  
  
Also today in _Microsoft v. ATT_ , the Court came out very strongly for the
doctrine that, unless there is express language in U.S. statutes covering
extraterritorial acts, U.S. patent law should be construed to not cover them.
Seven Justices came out strongly in favor of strict construction in this
sense, with only one dissent. _Microsoft_ also holds that mere software
instructions do not constitute "components" of patented products: only their
specific physical instantiations do. The statutory language makes it an act of
infringement to export "components" of patented products overseas that can be
easily assembled into a product which if manufactured, sold, or used in the
U.S. would infringe the U.S. patent.  
  
Microsoft Windows had already been held to violate AT&T;'s patent when copied,
sold or used in the U.S. When Microsoft snail-mailed a master disk of Windows
code overseas, and when it sent Windows code overseas over the Internet, the
Federal Circuit held that these acts constituted exporting "component(s)" of
Windows and thus was also an infringement. Seven Justices disagreed with the
Federal Circuit but differed a bit on just what constitutes a "component".
Justices Ginsburg, Kennedy, Scalia, and Souter argued that a specific copy of
code instantiated on the specific disk to be installed in the target computer
is a component. Justices Alito, Breyer and Thomas disagreed, opining that only
software when running on a computer constituted a component -- even the code
residing on the specific disk to be installed into a specific computer does
not. Only, surprisingly, Justice Stevens dissented that the export of a master
disk in this case in itself constituted exporting "the functional equivalent
of a warehouse of components" and thus a "component" under the statutory
language. I agree with Stevens that software is more analogous to a player
piano roll than to the notes on a sheet of music to which the plurality
compared it, although I disagree with his conclusion. In the case of a player
piano roll and software the human mediated in their execution is trivial --
simply starting up the machine so that the instructions can be copied from the
roll or disk and executed on the machine, whereas the blueprints and sheets of
music cited by the majority are human- but not machine-interpreted design
documents.  
  
_A 19th century player piano ready to play the instructions on its paper
roll._  
  
Stevens is right about the analogy, but he misses the point correctly
emphasized by the majority -- that statutes are to be construed narrowly to
avoid encroaching on extraterritorial jurisdiction. This doctrine argues
strongly for not assuming that Congress meant "component" to include anything
more than physical parts -- it does not include mere instructions even when
those instructions can be automatically executed and constitute the practical
entirety of the invention. The majority also pointed out an important policy
consideration that Congress probably did not consider: that it might be
impossible for the exporter of software to control subsequent overseas acts of
copying and use that constitute infringement, and thereby problematic to hold
said exporter liable for it, whereas in the case of physical parts the degree
of infringement is strictly limited by the number of parts exported.  
  
The Court's ringing restatement of the doctrine that U.S. statutory law be
construed to not encroach on extraterritorial jurisdictions could have
implications in a number of areas such as the Federal Circuit's holding that
foreign sales will not be recognized under the first sale exhaustion rule and
cases where the patent's components, for example network nodes, reside in
several countries, rather than in a single country. In _Jazz Photo_ the
Federal Circuit held that it would act as if sales that occurred outside the
U.S. simply didn't occur -- rather like holding that your purchase of a car in
Canada cannot be recognized in the U.S., so that you have no right to complain
if it is stolen. In the infamous Blackberry case, it held that, because one of
the components of RIM's network and RIM's Blackberry wireless e-mail users
were located in the U.S., RIM infringed the U.S. patent, even though most of
the functionality that violated the patent was located at a relay station and
server farm in Canada. The patent challenger in that case had the same option
the Court said AT &T; had in this case -- to get a Canadian patent and protect
its rights in Canada. Instead, it obtained only a U.S. patent and used that
patent successfully in the Federal Circuit to attack foreign activities more
properly addressed under Canadian jurisdiction. There are many other cases
where the Federal Circuit has short-shrifted foreign patent jurisdiction and I
hope today's ringing call to respect these jurisdictions will be heeded by the
Federal Circuit and that it will thus revisit many of its relevant holdings.  
  
Chief Justice Roberts, a great fan of achieving unanimity in order to boost
the authority of the Court, was able to create unanimity here in a barely
disguised effort to teach the Federal Circuit that it, and not the Federal
Circuit, is the Supreme Court in patent law as elsewhere. The Federal Circuit
hears the vast majority of patent appeals and for decades it has acted as the
_de facto_ supreme court of patents. In those rare cases where the real
Supreme Court spoke on patents the Federal Circuit often construed its
holdings quite narrowly and continued on much as before. Roberts' ability to
create unanimity in _KSR_ and near unanimity in _Microsoft_ will hopefully go
a long way towards persuading the Federal Circuit to more closely and fully
follow Supreme Court precedents in the patent field.  
  
I'll probably have much more to say about these two landmark cases in the
future.  
  
Here are the full opinions:  
  
 _KSR v. Teleflex_  
 _Microsoft v. AT &T;_  
  
Here are some relevant old blog posts of mine:  
  
On _KSR v. Teleflex_  
On the Blackberry transnational infringement case  
On the first sale exhaustion rule

