Research In Motion, Ltd. of Canada, which lost a very big (both in terms of
dollars and legal precedent) case to NTP, Inc., over NTP's patent for a
distributed e-mail system, has now asked the United States Supreme Court to
hear the case.  
  
The big legal issue is how to determine patent infringement when distributed
systems (for example, Internet protocols) span borders.  
  
Specifically, the issue under United States patent law is whether a system
claim (or method claim) of a United States patent can be infringed when some
features of the working system are located outside United States territory,
but most the system elements or method steps are located within the United
States, as are users. In this case a part of the system (and at least one of
the steps of the method) corresponds to RIM's relay located in Canada; the
other elements or steps (BlackBerries and the operations performed on them)
and the users at issue are located within the United States. Another issue is
whether RIM's infringement was direct or contributory infringement. A third
issue is whether any international law is implicated.  
  
If only some elements or steps need to be in a country to infringe a patent in
that country, the operator of a patented protocol spanning two or more
countries might be sued for infringing the same patent in two or more
countries. There is a grave danger that the patent holder could recover far
more damages than it would otherwise be entitled to. To avoid this, the
international law principle of comity might have to be invoked to determine
which country has jurisdiction. On the other hand, if all the elements or
steps must be in a single country in order to infringe a patent, this leaves a
loophole whereby makers of distributed systems can ignore patents as long as
some of the features are located in different countries.  
  
When the Federal Circuit, which has jurisdiction over patent appeals in U.S.
patent infringement cases, first heard the case it said that the system claim
was indeed directly infringed. It then reheard the case and decided that the
method claim was not infringed. Their opinion was based on precedent from two
older cases. The first case held that a system claim for a navigation system
used in international waters was infringed because it was controlled from the
United States. The second case held that a manufacturing process claim was not
infringed if one of the steps was performed in Japan.  
  
As a result of the dubious analogy of these two precedents (there are no
binding cases more on-point) the Federal Circuit has somewhat illogically
distinguished between a claim for a distributed algorithm and the same claim
restyled as a distributed system. My own opinion is that, until a treaty is
signed to say otherwise, all the elements and steps should have to be within
the United States in order to infringe a United States patent. This leaves a
loophole in patent law, but that's better than the injustices and
international law issues that are raised by courts reaching across borders to
find infringement in remote Internet servers. Furthermore, if what RIM did is
considered infringement it should classified as contributory not direct
infringement. RIM's customers may be "using" the patent "within the United
States," but RIM itself is not. RIM would however be contributing to the
infringement by providing the BlackBerries and running their e-mail relay and
thus would still be liable. In other circumstances with no contributory
infningement, however, it would be a grave injustice to find direct
infringement in the United States because one was simply operating one element
or step of the United States patent overseas.  
  
The case before the Supreme Couret is now denoted Research In Motion, Ltd. v.
NTP, Inc., Supreme Court No. 05-763, opinion below, NTP, Inc. v. Research In
Motion, Ltd., 418 F.3d 1282 (Fed. Cir. 2005).  
  
Read more information on this case here.

