The good news is that one can develop a largely non-coercive system out of a
coercive one. Its origin was necessarily coercive and it remains "locally
coercive" insofar as its procedural law involves acts like legal arrest,
search and seizure, etc., but its substantive law is largely non-coercive,
i.e. based on the libertarian principle of non-initiation of force.  
  
Not utopia, as the traditional English common law (evolved by judges over
several hundred years of court cases) largely followed this pattern, and
indeed (if we ignore modern legislation) mostly still does.  
  
Think of protocol layers (or if you don't know some computer network design,
think of the layers that go into building a road: e.g. dirt, gravel, asphalt).
The bottom layer is legal procedure, protected by a military where necessary,
and involves some coercive acts. But it supports a layer of substantive law --
tort, property, contract, and the like -- that can and should enforce non-
coercion between people.  
  
Indeed, the moral principle of non-initiation of force, far from being a
possible _basis_ of society as Murray Rothbard and David Friedman would have
it, is a sophisticated _outcome_ of long legal evolution and a highly involved
legal procedure that itself cannot stick to that principle: it coerces people
to a certain extent so that they will not coerce each other to a much greater
extent.  
  
P.S. sorry to nit, but to avoid searching errors it's Mancur Olson with an
"o".  
  
The main things to recommend in Olson are (1) his critique of Coase (although
IMHO my own critique is more rigorous, but it was inspired by Olson's), and
(2) his "roving bandit" vs. "stationary bandit" analysis of coercive outcomes
in a lawless anarchy. Both of these can be found in his _Power and
Prosperity_. Otherwise his analysis is blandly conventional, focusing on
"democracies" and their supposed superiority (he is entirely unconvincing in
trying to explain why democracies are supposedly economically superior to
monarchies, for example -- his original "stationary bandit" seems to work best
as a monarch, and not so well when figures in government change more often,
when majorities can rob minorities, etc.)  
  
Of course, we and history have seen big problems trying to keep the legal
procedure layer to stick to enforcing substantive non-coercion and not turn
into a modern "redistributive" government on the one hand or an oppressive
tyranny on the other. There's no avoiding study of real constitutions and real
legal systems in order to figure out where mistakes have been made so that we
can do better next time.

