 _Extremely unlikely to happen in the US wouldn't you say?_  
  
For the present, yes. But attitudes may well be changing with respect to
political correctness. Furthermore, there are related trends, such as the rise
of gated communities that desire homogenous cultures, that will put pressure
towards local choice and autonomy in deeds and covenants. And there already
are some kinds of discriminatory covenants (for example, that forbid selling
or renting homes to sex offenders) that would probably be upheld today.
Minority communities are strongly asserting their rights to preserve their
cultures and ultimately this will set a precedent for all ethnic communiities.
After first ignoring discrimination against minorities, and then ignoring
discrimination against majorities (e.g. affirmative action), cases such as the
recent overturning of affirmative action by the U.S. Supreme Court are now
brining the Equal Protection Clause to an ultimately neutral equilibrium.
Autonomy demanded by one ethnic community will ultimately be available to all.  
  
Local cultural autonomy via a restoration of property rights, while far from
the minds of most judges today, has a firm grounding in traditional property
law and is far more likely than legal acceptance of overt discrimination
enforced at very large scales such as at national borders. That far more
thoroughly violates the Equal Protection Clause, and there are numerous ethnic
constituencies within U.S. borders whose associational freedoms and equal
protection rights would be severely impacted. They would quite rightly object
to such discrimination and I would wholeheartedly agree with them. (If we were
talking about an ethnically homogenous area like Japan or Scandinavia the
analysis would likely be quite different).  
  
There is a legitimate legal interest in preserving English law and language as
the legal standard of the United States, just as there is a legitimate
interest in requiring that computers speak Internet protocol before they can
participate on the Internet. Maintaining these legal standards can be done by
insisting on conducting trials and Congressional floor debates in English, on
printing laws and ballots only in English, and in requiring strong English
language skills and knowledge of English legal history as prerequisites for
U.S. citizenship. None of these are border issues, they are issues of the
tradition and integrity of the legal system itself.  
  
Discriminating against certain ethnicities at national borders under the cover
of spreading paranoia about terrorism is a disgusting and ultimately losing
tactic. (Disgusting not because of racism itself, but disgusting for imposing
that racism by force of law on remote strangers and disgusting for what it
does to our liberties). People are slowly starting to realize that terrorism
is not the huge threat it has been cracked up to be. Look at how well the
"Candidate of 9/11", the candidate of paranoia, Rudy Guliani, has fared in the
recent primaries for example, and how well the anti-illegal immigrant
candidates, Tom Tancredo and Duncan Hunter, have fared. All three sunk like
battleships at Pearl Harbor. National security is an important concern but
mixing it up with legitimate interests in ethnic autonomy in an ethnically
heterogenous country like the U.S. is an extremely bad idea.  
  
I thus find the emphasis on restricting immigration across national borders to
slow the growing ethnic imbalances to be a severe strategic mistake. That is a
losing battle. Growing ethnic imbalances are caused by imbalances in
reproduction rates. Restricting immigration does not globally reduce these
imbalances. Indeed forcing third world inhabitants to stay in the poverty of
their native countries enhances their fertility and thus ultimately
exacerbates the imbalances.  
  
The United States is an ethnically and racially heterogenous nation and all
kinds of people can, should, and will move freely into and out of it as well
as across state lines. To preserve ethnic or genetic identity requires a
restoration of property rights, giving greater political power and autonomy to
localities, and a restoration of legal authority to families and religious
communities.

