China had private tenure with fixed rents or taxes in most eras and areas,
much like Japan and Western Europe. The main difference between China and
Britain that I have surmised is that capital investments tended to occur at
two extremes in China: within family farms and from large state bureaucracies.
This also tended to be true in France which also lagged in the agricultural
and early industrial revolutions. Whereas Britain with the enclosure-and-
improvement movement found a happy medium, capital-intensive private farms
employing wage labor (the forerunner of modern corporate farming). These
achieved economies of scale and labor efficiencies that neither family farms
nor larger political bureaucracies could achieve. This different outcome may
derive from two factors: (1) the Chinese had more external security costs than
Britain, motivating them to keep a tigher grip over land and food and
increasing taxes, and (2) their property law may have been more rigid,
suitable only for family farms or state bureaucracies and not much in between.  
  
These are both very speculative conjectures though. Big caution: we actually
know very little about the details of the historical Chinese legal systems.
There is great uncertainty about them and various theorists have been all over
the map ranging from calling the emperors proto-Maoists to portraying their
system as a private property paradise. Both extremes are wrong except in
certain narrow times and places, but alas nobody really knows what the reality
is AFAIK. (If anybody knows a good study based on Chinese legal cases of the
ancient Chinese property law, translated into English, I'd love to see it, but
alas I've never encountered such a work).  
  
The origins of property are lost in prehistory, as practically all
agricultural societies had some form of it.  
  
The flat ownership (what in English law we call fee simple), a.k.a. several
property, system as opposed to "feudal" hierarchies of tenures (which range
from rental-at-will to long-term tenures nearly indistinguishable from what we
call "ownership") we get from Roman law. It was lost during the Middle Ages,
and reemerged during the British agricultural revolution alongside the
enclose-improvement movement. The hiearchical ("feudal") model was better
suited to protecting units of land smaller than a state from warfare, but
where security was provided by larger states or empires several property
(where ideally everybody owns rather than rents) tends to work better. In
between a common pattern was long-term leases with fixed rents, which isn't
terribly different from what we understand as "ownership" of several property.

