The modern joint-stock corporation has many sources in medieval Europe. First
among these was corporate law itself. Although the era is commonly referred to
as "feudalism," for the hierarchy of individually owned "fiefs" of land and
control of serfs as fixtures of that land, large amounts of wealth in Europe
were actually controlled by corporate entities. Chief among these were church
lands, the corporate entities being dioceses, religious orders and the Roman
Church itself. These entities controlled a substantial fraction of the land in
Western Europe. Furthermore cities (with varying degrees of political
independence), merchant guilds, craft guilds, and many charitable entities
(such as hospitals) were legal "corporations," i.e. artificial and perpetual
legal persons under law. Some basic issues in corporate law (for example, when
are officers individually liable for acts of the corporation, and when the
corporation is liable for acts of its agents) had already been solved in canon
law and urban law long before the joint-stock corporation.  
  
Another source of the joint-stock corporation was the tradition of dividing
ownership over tangible things into "shares." For example, it was common in
Italian maritime states fund the construction and operation of ships by
dividing them into a certain number of shares (24 and 64 were common
divisions). Share owners were responsible for funding voyages (not including
cargo, which was typically paid for by trading partnerships called _commenda_
) as well as the initial construction capital, and divided up the profits
(fees paid by the merchants less costs). This tradition faded away in Venice
when that republic's government took over ship ownership, but thrived across
the Italian penninsula in Genoa. Ship shares became embedded into maritime law
all over Europe and even survived the British Empire (today in Canada when you
register a boat the government still registers 64 shares in it for its owner).
The only organization controlled by the shareholders, however, was the captain
and crew of the ship.  
  
The medieval organizations that most resembled later joint-stock corporations
were the Genovese _maone_. These bore some strong resemblances to the
_publicani_ tax farming corporations of the Roman Republican era, although it
is not clear how they could have survived the intervening Late Empire and Dark
Ages other than as very obscure (and perhaps now lost) written descriptions.
In form and function _maone_ also bore strong resemblances to some early
joint-stock companies such as the Bank of Amsterdam, Bank of England, and the
Dutch and English East India Companies.  
  
The Italian cities often sold off their tax receivables to wealthy merchants
at a discount as a way to borrow funds. (Discounting was one of the many ways
late medieval financiers avoided the rather lax and narrow usury
restrictions). The debts were divided into equal shares called _loca_ or
_partes_. Legally, these shares were personal property (chattels) and could be
freely traded.  
  
Technically, no organization was created when the city sold its tax
receivables to merchants. However, to effectively collect the taxes, the
holders of _loca_ formed an organization called a _maona_ or _societas
comperarum_. This organization would then subcontract to tax farmers to
collect the taxes. By the fourteenth century, Genovese _maone_ also engaged in
military conquest and colonization. These were, quite literally, corporate
raiders.  
  
Normally, _maone_ were temporary, but some of them ended up lasting for a long
time. In 1346 the _Maona di Chio e di Focea_ (a company for managing the taxes
of Chios and Focea) was formed. This organization's members obtained from
Genoa the exclusive right to collect taxes from Chios (an Aegean island) and
Phocaea (a port on the Anatolian coast). But first the company would have to
conquer them! Although technically a temporary organization, it lasted until
1566.  
  
Rather than going to buy receivables from Genoa, subscriptions to the _di Chio
e di Focea's_ _loca_ shares (still legally debt, but to be paid out in
dividends as taxes and trading revenues were collected) went to fund 29
galleys to conquer Chios and Phocaea. The Genovese Republic, for a fee,
granted the organization exclusive rights to collect taxes from the conquered
territories as well as special trading privileges. The conquests, taxes, and
trading were at least partially successful, and by the 16th century more than
600 persons owned _loca_ of the _maona._ This function and some of this
structure would later be emulated by the Dutch and English India Companies,
but with a basic legal difference -- "shares" in these later joint-stock
companies would constitute ownership (like ship shares) not debt as with the
_maona._  
  
The most famous Genovese _maona_ was the _Officium procuratorum San Giorgio_ ,
later the _Banco di San Giorgio_. Founded in 1407, this bank (and a later
Genovese bank along the same lines, the Bank of Genoa) would be the
inspiration for later central banks such as the Bank of Amsterdam and the Bank
of England. _Banco di San Giorgio_ came to administer most of the Genovese
Republic's debts. Dividends were paid out of tax collections (less directly
than with earlier _maona_ , but still more directly than the later Bank of
England). The _maona_ business was becoming more monopolistic, as it had
become in Venice and would become with later central banks.  
  
At the same time, however, the ship share system spread to northern Europe and
branched out beyond ships. In Italy and Germany by the 16th century a wide
variety of mines were divied up into ownership shares. During the Reformation,
a pious follower of Martin Luther gave him some _kuxen_ , shares in a mine in
Saxony. Luther complained that he did not know what to do with them. (Indeed,
since as with ship shares the mine managers could call on investors to pay up
more capital, ownership was not for the financially naive).  
  
 _Martin Luther_  
  
Ship shares and mine shares like these were issued in small numbers (usually
between 24 and 640) and thus were not typically traded on exchanges. The
number of employees was also small, usually no more than a few dozen. _Kuxen_
were reportedly sometimes traded at the Leipzig fairs. Indeed, illiquidity was
the rule in the first century of English joint-stock companies. It was not
until the _Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie_ (the Dutch East India Company,
founded out of a merger of smaller colonial companies in 1602) that volume
existed to trade company shares on exhanges (which up to that time traded
state and municipal bonds and commodities).  
  
Interestingly, the first joint-stock companies chartered by the English Crown
(starting in 1553) were companies involved in trading (the Muscovy and Levant
companies), mining (the Royal Mines and the Mineral and Battery), and trading
combined with conquest (the India Companies, the Virginia and Plymouth
companies, etc.) The two mining companies borrowed not only shares but
managers and engineers (presumably along with their techniques) from Germany.
The Genovese for their part would have felt at home with the trading and
conquest companies.  
  
References include:  
  
Harold Berman, _Law and Revolution_.  
  
Guido Ferrarini, "Origins of Limited Liability Companies and Company Law
Modernisation in Italy: A Historical Outline", _Centro di Diritto e Finanza_
WP 5-2002.  
  
Meir Kohn, "The Capital Market Before 1600", working paper 99-06, February
1999.

