 _Would you say that if modern Europe had just discovered America today, that
it would be incapable of colonizing it?_  
Obviously I would not say any such thing. Observe that my hypothetical was a
fully self-sufficient space colony, like those of some of the remoter and
smaller Polynesian islands, not of a space colony per se.  
  
First of all, the American colonies were not fully self-sufficient. They
imported a wide variety of manufactured goods from Britain and exported a wide
variety of wood-derived products, sugar (in the West Indies), cotton, etc.
Second and more importantly, as with the South Sea islands settled by the
Polynesians, a rich native ecosystem already existed, and it would not have
required a modern industrial infrastructure to establish self-sufficient
communities, albeit these communities, lacking the manufactured goods of
Britain, would have been poorer than the actual American colonies. No such
native ecosystem exists beyond earth in our solar system. Modern industrial
technologies and materials, based on a vast division of labor, are required to
start a colony beyond earth, an a thorough and unimaginably complex redesign
of practically every tool and machine to be used on the colony will be needed
before it can become even remotely close to self-sufficient. Even then the
colony without substantial exports to and imports from earth will be much
poorer than earthside developed countries due to the relative lack of division
of labor.  
  
Thus my conclusion that we won't be setting up any independent economies any
time soon -- we have to keep our global economy working here.  
  
Your launch cost comment takes us well beyond the scope of my article, but
given the history of transportation costs and technologies over the last fifty
years, including the many claims to dramatically lower launch costs, and the
vast attention and resources that have gone into such efforts, that have all
fizzled out, I'm highly skeptical about such predictions. A more promising
approach is the road less traveled by futurists: to search for ways to use
native space environments to find or do things we can't easily do or find on
earth, and then export them to earth in a high value/mass ratio form, in a way
that makes money at current launch costs. Currently and for the near future
this is limited to obtaining, transmitting, and relaying information, which
has practically infinite value/mass. Such businesses will be deeply integrated
with earth's economy. They are not likely to be politically autonomous, much
less economically self-sufficient.

