In my old essay on micropayments and mental transaction costs, besides
pointing out that mental transaction costs were a far more important barrier
to Internet micropayments than computational transaction costs, I sketched
some ideas for tools to lower mental transaction costs. Lowering mental
transaction costs enables pricing at finer granularity, which increases price-
sensitive behavior and thus the efficient allocation of scarce resources. I
also used electricity conservation as a practical example of how mental
transaction costs pose a barrier to price flexibility and thus to
conservation. It turns out that electricity conservation is among the first
areas to benefit from smart contracts that lower mental transaction costs.  
  
This paper I presented at the Second Berlin Internet Economics Workshop in
1999 provides more detail on the economic theory behind mental transaction
costs. Basically, mental transaction costs are the "hassle factor" one
experiences when spending money: the costs of translating one's own knowledge
and preferences into buying decisions. Mental transaction costs pose a severe
limit on the efficiency of markets in general and on useful price granularity
in particular; they are the main reason consumers generally prefer flat-rate
pricing and why high price granularity (and thus micropayment) is usually
useless.  
  
Tools to lower mental transaction costs have vast potential but present many
problems, especially "determining what the parties want in the first place."
The most promising tools are smart contracts -- computerized devices that
respond to the environment according to price signals or other contractual
terms, customer preferences, and other states or events that are encoded in
them or that they are encoded to respond to. Many smart contracts in the
future may be programmed using a contract drafting language for specifying
their event-driven behavior.  
  
(I have also emphasized making smart contracts securely self-enforcing or
self-verifying, but that is a different topic from this post, which deals with
the role of smart contracts in lowering mental transaction costs).  
  
Mental transaction costs pose a barrier to any scheme to go from flat rate to
variable pricing in order to conserve resources. Such a scheme may be made
possible only by technological or institutional breakthroughs which lower
mental transaction costs. Faruqui and Earle[1]'s description of California's
Demand Response scheme for peak-demand pricing of electricity is generally a
good description of a successful and promising program that increases
conservation and reduces the danger of blackouts by going from flat pricing to
three price tiers (off-peak, peak, and critical peak). But the article fails
to recognize the important role of mental transaction costs when increasing
the number of price tiers. The authors do, however, recognize two important
success factors. The importance of these factors provides strong evidence that
mental transaction costs and tools that save on these costs will crucial in
determining the scope and success of California's demand-sensitive pricing
scheme. The authors observed that "[o]n average, residential customers reduced
peak loads on critical days by 13.1 percent." The reduction was much larger
for customers with central air conditioning. More interesting still, customers
with "automatic price-sensitive thermostats" saved twice as much energy as
customers that did not have these smart contract devices.[2]  
  
The first effect comes about because on average each central air unit consumes
far more power than each window unit; correspondingly the same mental
transaction costs expended in controlling the thermostat of the former saves
far more energy and thus money than controlling the latter. The second effect
comes because the price-sensitive thermostat is a specialized smart contract
that allows for simple input preferences (a simple table of preferred
temperature at each of three to five price levels depending on the contract)
and then runs automatically. It thus fulfills (for this particular function)
my hopes of using simple user interfaces to input preferences into smart
contracts which then make purchases automatically, thereby reducing the the
mental transaction costs otherwise imposed by multi-tier pricing.  
  
In its most general form, a smart contract will have a market translator that
specifies a purchasing or selling action based on a function of current
budget, environmental variables, and current and predicted (e.g. according to
rational expectations models) prices:  

> transaction_decision = f(preferences, budget, environment, prices, price
model)

That general description makes it all rather complicated; in practice there
will be quite simplified versions based on simple versions of a subset of
these variables that work in particular niches where those variables dominate
preferences. An example of this simplicity is the "automatic price-sensitive
thermostats" mentioned above. Programming this thermostat is only a bit more
complicated than a normal thermostat: one programs in multiple temperatures
each corresponding to a price level. For example, at an off-peak charge of 9
cents/kilowatt*hour, the summer air conditioning thermostat might be set to 72
degrees, while the normal peak price of 22 cents might be set to 74 degrees
and the critical peak price (the hottest days when California would without
substantial conservation otherwise be in danger of blackout) of 60 cents set
to 77 degrees. So you input three settings instead of one. Presumably when you
want to change the settings you can do it one at a time or change all three at
a time by the same amount. That takes substantially more effort than a normal
thermostat, but the California experiment showed that where the overall use
controlled by that thermostat is great enough and the price differential high
enough, it's worth the effort.  
  
A bit more generally, a preference for physical state of the world can be
specified by specifying a function  

> preferred_state = f(current price)

The thermostat then, like any thermostat, purchases electricity based on the
function  

> if actual_state > preferred_state then purchase (turn on consumption)  
> else don't purchase (turn off consumption)  
>

(Reverse to "<" when heating rather than cooling and analogously for other
kinds of physical states). The most typical example is the thermostat where
the desired state has one dimension (temperature), but one can think of other
desired states such as illumination patterns (also tied to current electricity
prices), high network bandwidth and low latency applications such as video on
demand, and so on which are multidimensional. Where price granularity is small
and discontinuous (as in the three-tier price scheme described above) a simple
table is probably the lowest mental transaction cost way of inputting the
preferences. Where the price changes continuously, a simple graphical
interface with a touch-sensitive cursor to define the price/state curve may be
the best option, but realize that the transaction costs for the latter may be
far larger than the former for the typical user, and so justified only when
the value of resources conserved by price is much greater.

Offline References:  
  
[1] Ahmad Faruqui and Robert Earle, "Demand Response and Advanced Metering,"
Regulation v. 29 n. 1 (Spring 2006).  

[2] Id. at pg. 25.

