raj: _How can we assume that the markets will have the maturity and
wherewithall to strike a balance and compensate as required for the weakning
dollar._  
  
Neither markets nor anything else can fully compensate for the weakening
dollar. We can reduce but not avoid the extensive inefficiencies caused by
changing inflation expectations and the resulting distortion of price signals
away from those that would be given by an efficient market. Today's markets
include very distorted prices (such as bizarre relative prices between oil and
other energy sources) that wouldn't exist without the inflation expectations
having driven up oil but not (as much, yet) most other energy sources. On the
other hand, if we have to just live with the inflation expectations, the
markets are doing far better than any plan could to compensate for them. For
example, inflation expectations in the floating currencies are making oil,
like gold traditionally, become more important as a money substitute or hedge
than as an energy source. So if we can't fix the floating currencies, we
should be moving to other energy sources that are not nonrenewable commodities
that behave like gold, and leave oil like gold to function primarily as a
money substitute and hedge. That is just what the incentives created by high
gas prices are doing.  
  
 _How can we conclude that benevolent groups (retirees etc..) are using the
commodity index approach? It could be soverign funds and may be oil producing
countries fed up with weak dollar?_  
  
Everybody in the know with long-term savings who can hedge with commodity
indices is doing so, whether one personally likes these savers or not. One's
personal opinion of them does not justify violating their property rights.
Furthermore, much (and probably most) of the oil price increase is driven
simply by the "speculation" of oil countries pumping less until the price
rises to match their heightened inflation expectations. No commodity market
regulation can change that behavior. Even if commodity markets had been shut
down the last 5 years, oil countries would have eventually caused the same
price rises as the retirement and sovereign funds have caused by their
decisions to slow down pumping oil until the price had risen to reflect the
higher inflation expectations.  
  
 _An after thought, why not go back to the gold standard?_  
  
It's not a bad idea: the 1970s and today demonstrate that the grand experiment
with floating currencies produces too many price distortions to work well in a
modern economy, and there are too many political influences to make every
decade be like the placid 1980s and 1990s when floating currencies worked
pretty well. In effect, a fractional reserve commodity index currency is just
what is emerging in the international markets (by e.g. using the rollover
positions technique to construct commodity index ETFs) but legal barriers
which I've described elsewhere prevent us from using it instead of dollars for
everyday transactions. Today in the U.S. when I write a check it must be
denominated in an official government currency. Once I can write a check for
"10 and 21/100 DBCs" instead of "473 and 94/100 dollars" we will have a more
stable economy sending far more accurate price signals.

