Ed Felten redubs smart contracts, at least for the purposes of tying, "PRM"
(Property Rights Management). A traditional example of tying is the razors-
and-blades strategy: a company sells you a razor at a loss and recoups the
profit on the blades. This marketing strategy is also popular with printers
and cartridges. To prevent consumers from buying off-brand cartridges and
thereby foiling the marketing strategy, some printer manufacturers have
embedded a cryptographic protocol whereby the printer authenticates the
cartridge as containing the private key of the manufacturer. Extrapolating
from this example, Felton complains about looming restrictions on our use of
everyday items if "PRM" becomes a reality. Tyler Cowen rebuts Felten's
complaints with respect to tying on economic grounds, pointing out that where
manufacturers have an incentive to tie, it generally increases the welfare of
consumers as a whole as well as manufacturers.  
  
While I am a proponent of most kinds of smart contracts, I'm also quite
sympathetic to the freedom-to-tinker movement. I generally oppose legislation
like DMCA that artificially protects insecure smart contracts. And consumers
should be empowered to choose their smart contracts wisely. I support open
source protocols so that somebody neutral has read the smart fine print. Smart
contract protocols, like legal contracts, should be in the public domain.  
  
As a commentor to Felten's post pointed out, manufacturers usually don't have
contractual privity with consumers, unless you order direct. Through smart
contracts, manufacturers may gain some digital privity with the end user.  
  
At least in the context of the United States legal system, it's fair for
manufacturers to restrict how consumers can use their products, since,
breaching privity, U.S. courts at least have already decided that
manufacturers are strictly liable for unsafe products, often even when the
consumers misuse them. Thus manufacturers go to great lengths to make products
"idiot proof" and also, alas, "tinker proof." Since Felton wants the freedom
to tinker, he should oppose strict product liability. At least, people who
tinker and get hurt should not be able to sue the manufactuer.

