Owen: As a general comment, Diamond has had some valuable insights, but much
of what he and other people that focus on variables such as climate, geology,
and ecology do is "drunk looking under the lamp-post" kind of theorizing: they
look at some less important factors that can be more easily studied by the
non-social sciences and overstate their importance to social development.  
  
Let's start with the "Germ" hypothesis. Assuming Diamond's big-arc causation
big continent -> more domesticable plants and animals -> more diseases and
immunities is true, that still doesn't explain most of the historically
important differences, for example, why Spain and England rather than Arabia,
India, China, Japan, or any number of cultures located on the coasts of
Eurasia settled most of the disease-decimated New World. It also doesn't
explain the relationship between Eurasia and Africa -- neither has been
decimated by the diseases of the other anything like the New World was. And
obviously it doesn't account for the many differences between different parts
of Eurasia.  
  
In short, the "Germs" theory is like a joke that is funny once -- it explains
an important part of why aboriginal natives offered such weak resistance to
the Europeans, but not much else of historical importance. (Yes, I know about
the bubonic plague in 6th and 14th century Europe -- the historical
consequences of these have been greatly overstated, IMHO, compared to more
important but more difficult and subjective social explanations -- these are
also examples of "drunk under the lamp-post" theorizing. For example, which I
can go into more detail if there are strong requests, Mancur Olson's "roving
bandit" theory is a far more important explanation of the Western European
Dark Ages than the 6th century plague).  
  
As for the "Steel" hypothesis (the "Guns" seems to be a poetic redundancy),
Diamond from what I recall just presented a naked claim here -- he described
no evidence at all that there was geologically better iron ores in Europe than
in Near, South, East Asia or Africa or the Americas. As far as I know, that
claim is geological nonsense, but if somebody can link to such evidence I'd be
happy to look at it. (No, differences in steel production don't constitute
evidence -- that is much more likely due to differences in technology or
capital investment -- nor is evidence of proven reserves, since discovery and
proof too are capital investments closely related to the technology. I'm
looking for an actual study that accounts for differences in discovery efforts
or gives some geological theory explaining why Europe was especially blessed
at the formation of the earth or continents with iron ore).  
  
An idea Diamond briefly put forth that Western Europe has more coastline and
thus more ability to trade by sea strikes me as silly. Coastlines are fractal
and how long the coastline is depends at what fractal scale you look at it.
Diamond chose a scale that makes Europe's coasts look more ragged than
China's. There are plenty of good harbors in every coastal region of Asia, and
it was easier for China to build canals between its productive regions than
England or most of Western Europe. (And they did build such canals long before
England built its canals. But neither those canals nor its earlier inventions
of printing, burning coal and refined oil, gunpowder, or a number of other
things, caused China to go into an industrial revolution -- instead it
stagnated until about two decades ago).  
  
The most important explanations for historical differences between peoples are
in order of importance (1) cultural differences, especially institutional
differences in politics, law, and economics, (2) genetic differences, and (3)
the "drunk under the lamp-post" differences popular among scientists such as
climate, ecology, and geological endowment.

