The recognition of common law rights that could trump legislative statute and
royal edict had already long been recognized in England by the time of
_Bonham's Case_ in 1610:  

> ...it appears in our books, that in many cases, the common law will control
acts of parliament, and sometimes adjudge them to be utterly void: for when an
act of parliament is against common right and reason, or repugnant, or
impossible to be performed, the common law will control it, and adjudge such
act to be void.

  
In the United States, Supreme Court recognition of unenumerated rights has
been the norm since shortly after our Constitution was ratified, except for
the short "footnote four" period during the pathological New Deal Court. Four
heroic justices fought against the stripping of "mere economic" property and
contract rights, and illegal expansion of federal powers, undertaken during
the New Deal.  
  
Unfortuneately (in hindsight, given the later replacement of natural law
philosophy and demotion of common law to statutory law) rather than invoking
the Ninth Amendment, unenumerated rights were at first justified by the Court
as a matter of natural rights. In Calder v. Bull (1798) Justice Chase, voting
with a unanimous Court, wrote:  

> There are acts which the Federal, or State, Legislature cannot do, without
exceeding their authority. There are certain vital principles, in our free
republican governments, which will determine and overrule an apparent and
flagrant abuse of legislative power; as to authorize manifest injustice by
positive law; or to take away that security for personal liberty, or private
property, for the protection whereof the government was established. An ACT of
the Legislature (for I cannot call it a law), contrary to the great first
principles of the socical compact, cannot be considered a rightful exercise of
the legislative authority.

  
In the later legal positivist era they were classified as substantive
liberties under the Due Process Clause.  
  
Infamies such as _Korematsu_ occurred soon after the New Deal Court rejected
the idea of unenumerated rights. This absolutist approach was itself
effectively rejected when _Griswold_ found an unenumerated right of privacy
implied by the "penumbras" and "emanations" of the enumerated Bill of Rights.
The right of privacy was later classified as a substantive liberty under the
Due Process Clause.

