I am quite chagrined that a number of influential folks have almost reached
the same conclusion as I, namely they've concluded that "speculation" not
fundamentals are driving most of the recent commodities rise, yet they reach a
policy conclusion that is utterly insane: restrict or ban much of this
"speculation". They stop at the word "speculation", repelled in horror by the
idea, and don't take it a step farther -- ask why this "speculation" is going
on. A good clue comes from those responsible for the biggest piece of it --
retirement funds. Retirement funds have long been heavy, relative to other
kinds of funds, on less volatile (over <15 year periods) investments like
bonds. But bonds are mostly denominated in dollars. With the threat of dollar
inflation (apparent from the recent drop in the dollar, from recent Fed
activity, and from the history of the floating dollar in the 1970s) they have
a fiduciary responsibility to protect their investors' retirement nest eggs by
hedging bond positions with commodities baskets. And that is just what they
have been doing. Besides providing an inflation hedge and a performance
comparable to bonds since the dawn of the floating dollar era in 1970,
commodities are also "anti-correlative", i.e. they tend to move in the
opposite direction of stocks and bonds, substantially reducing the risk of the
overall portfolio. To suggest that commodities are not proper vehicles for
investment in this era of the floating dollar is stunningly pathological, but
that hasn't stopped a number of people who should know better from suggesting
this.  
  
(I suspect a similar explanation is behind much of the high Chinese demand --
but that rather than buying futures they are actually stockpiling commodities,
including cutting back on production of the mineral reserves that they own, to
hedge their peg to the U.S. dollar, their massive dollar earnings from
exports, and their heavy investments in U.S. Treasuries, all of which are
vulnerable to dollar drop or inflation -- but I don't know where data on such
stockpiling activity might be readily available).  
  
Many of these retirement funds can be politically influential. I wish, for the
sake of the retirees they have a duty to protect, they would defend themselves
politically against the insane proposals to restrict or ban commodity index
funds. Those seeking to save for retirement have perfectly good and strong
reasons for investing in commodity indices: they don't want to see their
retirement funds eroded away by inflation, as happened to millions of seniors
in the 1970s. More generally, people have a right to be free from ignorant
government interference and federal spite when they choose to hold their
savings in forms protected from the erosion of the dollar.  
  
Commodity index exchange traded funds (ETFs) have allowed people to construct,
without many of the costs, risks, and complexities of direct purchases of
commodity futures, retirement portfolios hedged against inflation. Portfolios
protected against inflation are an exceedingly valuable asset both for the
retirees and for the society on which said retirees will be less dependent.
They are also quite valuable for many other kinds of investors, such as
college endowments that lower the cost of tuition for future students and fund
research that benefits the future of us all. Instead of attacking the fever by
shutting down the immune system, i.e. instead of attacking the commodities
indices needed to hedge against inflation, it is the prior main cause of the
problem, Federal Reserve monetary policy, that needs to be addressed. The Fed
needs to put a higher priority on preserving the value of the dollar and
fighting inflation, and it needs to use leading indicators (e.g. commodity and
foreign exchange prices) far more than trailing indicators (e.g. CPI, PPI) in
this task. (I understand of course that the recent credit crunch has probably
been a very good reason for the Fed to "print dollars." That doesn't change
the fact that the Fed is smack dab in the middle of the causal chain that has
led to the commodities boom, and that savers have a right, and investment
funds a fiduciary duty, to protect their savings against the inflationary
effects of Fed policy).  
  
It's certainly possible that some of the commodities boom is a bubble. It is
often the case that economically efficient bull markets become overextended
into wasteful bubbles, it being very hard to tell just how large of a price
increase is actually warranted, and we may be seeing some of that now. (These
bubbles are allowed to occur by a _lack_ of available instruments for
speculation, especially the transaction costs involved in holding long-term
short positions against markets that may rise substantially further before
they fall. The worst way to combat a bubble is to ban the last modicum of
imperfect speculative mechanisms such as short sales that currently prevent
bubbles from getting worse). There is no easy way to gauge just how much
retirement funds and others seeking to hedge inflation need to allocate to
commodities baskets in order to optimize their portfolios, because it depends
greatly on future Fed behavior. On the one hand we know that hyperinflation
has sometimes occurred historically with floating currencies, so that dramatic
further increases in commodity prices are possible; on the other hand the
farther commodity prices go up (and they have gone up very far indeed) without
corresponding inflation in other goods and services, the more downside price
risk there is in commodities. Oil next year might be $40 per barrel, or $300
per barrel, or anything in between. It's certainly true that commodities have
become a far riskier, i.e. more volatile, investment than they were three
years ago, and that puts a severe limit on the proportion of an investment
portfolio it makes sense to devote to commodities. But that proportion is
certainly nowhere near zero as the lunatic anti-"speculation" activists would
have it.  
  
(This post is based on a comment I made on a previous post. Here,, h/t to
reader "munin", is a hedge fund guy who reaches almost the right theory, but
the abominable policy conclusion, and is the source of the graph above. Here
is some of my previous writing on this subject: The Monetary Value of Liquid
Commodities and Commodity Derivatives: The New Currencies).  
  
[Update: at least we don't have war hysteria (or click to enlarge the
facsimile at left). Note that Herber Hoover, who many history books still
proclaim with preposterous prevarication to have been a free market guy, and
who later presided over the start of the Great Depression, was at this time
(1917) the head of President Wilson's Food Administration, which came up with
this plan for "Control of Food By Government". Hoover's food plan, like the
crazy plans to "fix" the commodities markets today, was designed by and for
the ignorant and the paranoid, targetting "Evils" of "Unreasonable Profits,
Speculation, and Hoarding", i.e. the "evils" of people stocking up to ensure
own and their customers' future food supply instead of letting the benevolent
Herbert Hoover control it for them. Today it is apparently evil to protect
your retirement nest egg instead of letting it fall with the dollar].

