 _Extending the coincidence-of-wants metaphor to include temporal
conflicts..._  
  
A temporal conflict of the kind you described obviously implies a lack of
coincidence. It readily gives rise to the need for an intermediate commodity
rectify the lack of coincidence in a way that minimizes storage, transport,
and mental transaction costs. It certainly seems quite useful to treat *any*
non-coincidence, whether temporal or absolute, the same way if there is no
compelling reason to distinguish them, as indeed there is not here.  
  
 _The point of the thought-experiment is to establish that even in the absence
of transaction costs, there is another force for monetary standardization.
Saying "but there are transaction costs, even in Nitropia" is like objecting
to an explanation of the relativity twin paradox by saying that there are no
spaceships which can travel at 0.9c._  
  
No, it's like objecting to an analysis of the twin paradox at 1.1c when an
already stated assumption is that you can't go faster than 1.0c.  
  
What kinds of costs are "pain[s] in the butt" caused by lack of standards, if
not transaction costs? I and many other economists use "transaction costs" as
a catch-all category to refer to just these kinds of costs that are not
captured by some more specific economic category of costs. However vaguely you
did it, you invoked a transaction cost as one of your assumptions.  
  
All you have proven is that money can still be necessary in a world without
two particular kinds of transaction costs, namely storage and transport costs.
That doesn't prove anything about whether money would arise without
transaction costs generally.  
  
Indeed, quite clearly we would not need money if we could barter in a
perfectly efficient market, i.e. a market with no costs or "pain[s] in the
butt" of any kind.  
  
In any case, I did not make the idea of mental transaction costs up just now
to try to dump on your gedankenexperiment. They really are central to
explaining money. They were central to my now widely accepted explanation of
why micropayments generally fail. They correspond quite closely to your vague
reference to "pain[s] in the butt" caused by having to track prices in
multiple currencies. Which is why I brought this assumption out into the open
and formalized it in terms of mental transaction costs being, even in the
absence of storage and transport costs, sufficient for the emergence of money.  
  
In other words, it's just not the case that in *any* market money is needed or
will arise. It requires what you call the "pain in the butt" or what I call
signficant enough mental transaction costs to warrant it. Indeed, as I've
described it may be possible in some cases to use computers to minimize to
insignificance the "pain[s] in the butt" caused by multiple prices, and thus
create barter markets in which money is not needed.  
  
Indeed, this almost surely actually happens in certain narrow ways in the
computerized arbitrage that occurs in modern commodity markets. Furthermore,
the value of money in reducing mental transaction costs, storage costs, and
transport costs also explains why the price of a commodity used for one or
more of these monetary functions, including obviously gold but also
importantly most other commodities that can be traded with low transaction
costs, is often far higher than the price that would be predicted merely from
the industrial supply and consumption demand for that commodity. This is of
basic importance in, for example, explaining the prices on modern commodity
markets, as I explain here.

