Let's look at the full language:  
  
"The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and
effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated,
and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or
affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the
persons or things to be seized."  
  
Compare this to the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment:  
  
"... nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just
compensation."  
  
One could interpret the Fifth Amendment as saying that it's OK for the federal
government to take private property for private use without compensation.
Instead, the modifier "for public use" implies the government has no power to
take for private use whether just compensation is given or not. Similarly,
"...no warrant shall issue except..." implies that no searches, reasonable or
otherwise, may be conducted without a warrant.  
  
The requirement of a warrant is there to insure that an independent entity can
check to make sure the search is "reasonable." The language "particularly
describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized"
forces the searching party to articulate their reasons for the search and
allows the independent party to review those reasons. That is how rational
human beings determine whether searches are "reasonable."  
  
Like many other laws that protect human rights, there is a procedural
component and a substantive component to the Fourth Amendment, both of which
must be satisfied. Take away either the procedural or the substantive
requirement and you take away a crucial freedom.  
  
That the above interpretations of the Search Clause and the Takings Clause are
proper interpretations is reinforced by the main canon of construction for the
Constitution, the Ninth Amendment:  
  
"The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be
construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people."  
  
Customs searches are quite distinguishable from the federal government
secretly spying on international phone calls to or from the United States
because (1) customs searches at ports of entry are an ancient police power,
which long predates the United States and which was never abolished by the
United States as a violation of the Fourth Amendment, (2) the person to be
searched has notice, and (3) customs searches are not conducted in secret, so
the person searched has a chance to inform the public about them and to obtain
legal redress for an unreasonable search.  
  
Without such procedural protections the Fourth Amendment would be a sham. For
example, if the NSA is actually also spying on domestic-domestic calls without
a warrant, which I hope even anonymous would agree would be blatantly
unconstitutional, there would be no opportunity for the victim to obtain
redress in court. The procedural requirement, the warrant, is necessary to
give substance to the substantive requirement, that searches be reasonable.
Otherwise the Fourth Amendment is just a cruel joke.

