Alas, from what I've seen so far of the LabCorp v. Metabolite briefs, they
don't hit on the biggest problem in this area, namely the problem of
gratuitous elements.  
  
I have written about how software became patentable in the United States. In a
nutshell, the forbidden category of algorithms became patentable because the
trivial combination of (novel algorithhm + prior art patentable subject
matter) was held by the Federal Circuit to be patentable subject matter. Thus,
a good patent drafter could simply added a broad prior art element such as "a
device with memory" to an algorithm to make it patentable. (All digital
computers are devices with memory). Adding the gratuitous element did not add
to the novelty or non-obviousness of the invention, but instead served to make
the claim look like patentable subject matter.  
  
In LabCorp v. Metabolite, the claim has the pattern (novel scientific
discovery + prior art assay test). LabCorp's brief argues that the claim
covers a "law of nature" and is thus unpatentable. But their main argument,
following dicta in Diehr, that the claim covers all practical uses of the
scientific discovery, is false. Scientists and doctors are still free to
discuss the scientific discovery and use it in ways that don't involve the
assay test. This severely cripples science and engineering involving the
discovery without a license, but it doesn't 100% eliminate it as defendant
Metabolite claims. The problem is that this supposed holding of Diehr combined
with the use of gratuitous elements makes the subject matter restrictions of
35 U.S.C. 101 an effective nullity. Having failed to understand the problem of
gratuitous elements, Metabolite is left without a good argument and the United
States Patent system is left without any effective restrictions on what kinds
of subject matter may be patented.  
  
The problem of gratuitous elements is not confined to subject matter
patentability. They also occur in damage calculations. It is now common for
patent drafters to add gratuitous elements to patent claims to make them cover
larger markets. An example, given by W. David Westergard, is that an inventor
thinks of a new hinge for a door. The patent drafter then drafts the claim
(novel hinge + prior art door). The jury is thus fooled into thinking that the
patentee should be awarded damages for the lost profits on doors instead of
just the lost profits on hinges. Indeed, Jeffrey G. Sheldon in How To Write a
Patent Application, the bible of patent drafting, recommends this strategy,
giving the example of claiming a toaster when all that has been invented is
the toaster thermostat. "When negotiating a license or arguing damages before
a jury, it would be better to work from a high royalty base that includes the
entire toaster oven."  
  
This problem of gratuitous elements used to inflate patent damage awards is
particularly severe in modern electronic devices that can contain hundreds of
patented parts or software. It is one of the big motivations behind the damage
reform provision in the 2005 Patent Act, which hopefully will be revived and
enacted (with some recommended changes, which I will post in the future) in
2006.

