Why did the early United States have much stronger property rights and far
lower taxes than today, even though it is nominally governed by the same
political form and a constitution that has undergone only a few amendments?
Why do Hong Kong and Singapore currently lead the world in economic freedom?
Why did the fall of the Berlin Wall spell the end of European communist
states? What political changes or changes to our own lives would give us
stronger property rights and lower taxes?  
  
What stands out about Singapore and Hong Kong --and other entities that have
the most economic freedom in their region, such as Bahrain in the Arab Middle
East -- is that they specialize in international trade. To encourage business
travel, they must put few restrictions and tax penalties on travel. Large
proportions of their population have strong international social ties. Large
proportions of the population of these countries could easily move out of the
country if their local rights were violated. Strong international personal and
business ties allow them to quickly reestablish themselves in a different, but
not so foreign, country.  
  
In other words, when a small country specializes in mediation of international
trade, the exit costs for the people from whom it collects most of its tax
revenue is low. To maintain their tax revenues they must maintain a productive
international trade business, and to maintain international trade these
governments must thus maintain low exit costs for a large proportion of their
population.  
  
 _Laffer curve of tax rate versus tax revenue (black) and corresponding curve
of GDP (green). When governments maximize tax revenue the prosperity and
economic freedom of their taxpayers suffer. Credit:Mark Byron._  
  
Governments of almost any form try to maximize their tax revenues, and
government employees also often gain personal satisfaction from being able to
control the lives and property of others (this goes under various euphemisms,
such as the ambitions to "change the world" and "make a difference.") This
process is facilitated primarily by high exit costs and is limited almost only
by limits on governmental ability to increase exit costs. The maximum point on
theLaffer curve -- the most tax that a government can collect -- is lower and
occurs at a lower percentage tax rate in countries where exit costs are low.
Thus the tax rates inHong Kong, Singapore, and Bahrain are lower than among
their culturally similar neighbors that do not specialize in as
internationalimermediaries.  
  
At the other end of the spectrum from Hong Kong and Singapore are countries
with isolated populations, with poor access to world communications and
travel. Add to this countries where tax revenues can be gained from taxing
agricultural land or minerals rather than potentially mobile "human capital."
These countries tend to have the fewest freedoms. Even among highly developed
countries, those with more homogeneous populations that speak a tongue seldom
spoken outside the country -- and thus far stronger internal than
international social ties -- tend to tax their "human capital" the most, e.g.
the Scandinavian countries.  
  
In other words:  
  
(1) the governments of Singapore and Hong Kong have to encourage free travel
to and from many other countries, to encourage the constant human interchange
that is essential to international trade, making it impractical to set up
onerous travel restrictions,  
  
(2) most residents of Singapore and Hong Kong have strong social ties -- both
business and personal -- outside the country, and  
  
(3) the vast majority of residents of almost all other countries are tied to
their territories by strong internal social networks and the lack of external
social networks that could support them if they needed to escape. That makes
it easy for governments to tax, regulate, and control the residents, for the
same reason that it's easy for prison guards to abuse inmates -- it's hard to
escape.  
  
The American colonies and the early American republic both had remarkably
strong property rights and very low taxes by our standards, despite sharp
changes in the form of government. With few changes in the form of government
since, taxes have risen almost tenfold and property rights often now mean
little more than the right to keep after-tax capital gains.  
  
The answer to this American puzzle is again exit costs. Farmland was the
dominant form of wealth in the 18th and early 19th century, and practically
free yet very good farmland was available in America on the western frontier.
Any oppression, any high taxes or other violations of property rights could be
countered by pulling up stakes and moving west. If you didn't want your local
farmers to leave you had to respect their rights, in sharp contrast to the
traditional form of agriculture where serfs were stuck on the land. On the
other hand, black slaves in the U.S. provide a sharp contrast to the
remarkably free white farmers -- a condition explained by state and federal
fugitive slave laws, which spread a virtual Iron Curtain for slaves across the
entire vast expanse of the United States, in free states as well as slave
states.  
  
Human capital is very easy to tax when it gathers in large organizations, such
as modern corporations, as these organizations must be audited, and auditing
provides the information needed for the income tax, by far the most lucrative
form of tax ever developed. When America's frontier disappeared, when the good
agricultural land was claimed and industrial wealth became more important than
agricultural wealth, and industrial wealth was flowed in easily audited forms
through corporations and to their employees, taxes rose and property rights
for all started to erode, a process that continues to this day.  
  
Countries that depend on human capital, as almost every country these days
does, often throw up legal barriers to exit. Countries that worry about "brain
drain" sometimes charge extortionate passport fees. These are examples of
countries erecting virtual Berlin walls in order to raise the exit costs of
their countries, suppress jurisdictional competition, and thus increase their
tax revenues. Another form of this are long-arm statutes, especially when used
to collect taxes on companies that have only "minimal contacts" with a
jurisdiction.  
  
Why are governments imposed on us rather than chosen? Why can't we shop for
countries like we shop for cars? Why has progress in jurisdiction shopping
movements such as the Free State Project been so slow? Because interstate
travel is considered a fundamental right under U.S. law, the exit costs
imposed by law on moving from state to state are very low. The slow progress
of the Free State Project points up several factors:  
  
(1) that many, if not most, taxes and other violations of property rights
considered onerous come from federal rather than local governments, and moving
just from state to state within the United States does not avoid these,  
  
(2) that no state, not even New Hampshire, is so remarkably better than any
other state to motivate many people to move, and  
  
(3) that local social ties -- whether for personal or business relationships
-- are much more expensive for most people to break than the gains to be had
from increased economic freedom between one state and another.  
  
In the United States and today in most of the world, exit costs are imposed
primarily by the ways we live our lives -- and in particular by our personal
and business networks -- not by artificial Berlin wall like barriers. Modern
deprivations of liberty have much more to do with this fact than with the
oftenexaggerated differences in forms of government or with supposedly crucial
rights such as the right to vote. Today, never in the United States have so
many people had the right to vote, yet never in the United States have we had
so high taxes and so few property rights.  
  
With the fall of communism, for most people in the world government
restrictions on exit are no longer the dominant barrier to exit. Our lack of
liberty has rather to do with the fact that the vast majority of our strong
social ties lie within a territory monopolized by a nation-state. Any form of
large modern nation-state that we can practically expect to encounter, as well
as any state of any size that restricts emigration, will engage in
extortionate deprivations of property that many people in many earlier times
and places, such as colonial America, did not tolerate.  
  
How, then, can one best protect one's rights? By living one's life in a way
that makes exit costs low:  

> Be prepared to vote with your feet. Add interstate and international
diversity to your social networks -- both personal and business. Lower your
costs of exiting, if the need should arise, the jurisdictions that impose on
the territories wherein you reside. Repeatedly in history -- from the old
American frontier to the fall of the Berlin Wall to modern jurisdictions that
specialize in international trade -- low exit costs have not only enabled
liberty for the individual and the small group, but they have more than any
other factor motivated the larger jurisdiction to provide the most important
rights and freedoms for those who stay put. Grow interpolitical roots so that
no single polity can chop down your tree. The good news is that modern
communications, travel, and standardization of international languages (mostly
on English) have made diversifying our social networks -- growing
international roots - far easier than ever before in history.

Despite the closing of physical frontiers, which has had an extremely
deleterious impact on freedom, other trends may be bringing about the lowering
of exit costs. International communications networks and the international
standardization on a few languages (and perhaps even just one, which quite
fortunately for my readers is the one I'm currently writing in), combined with
low international travel costs, are leading to the development of more strong
personal and business social ties that cross borders. Multinational small
businesses are joining multinational corporations in developing cross-border
business ties.  
  
But there are also many threats by governments to re-establish or increase
exit costs by throwing up virtual Berlin walls and fugitive taxpayer networks.
Extraterritorial assertions of jurisdiction, especially of tax jurisdiction,
threaten to throw up enforcement networks akin to the old fugitive slave laws
in the antebellum United States. Freedom of travel is being threatened by
paranoid responses to the overblown threat of terrorism -- but at least one
good group is fighting to counter this threat. To counteract these threats,
basic freedoms must be protected by our courts from encroachment by other
governmental branches. The U.S. Supreme Court counts both voting and
interstate travel as fundamental rights. Of these fundamental rights, travel
-- but especially _international_ travel -- the right to pass through the
airports and Brandenburg Gates and Checkpoint Charlies of the world -- is by
far the more important.

