I am horrified by the legislation the U.S. Senate passed today. It will, short
of a miracle, be signed by President Bush into law. The bill:  
  
(1) Suspends _habeas corpus_ for all aliens, including tens of millions of
aliens within the United States and its territories. This means resident
aliens can be imprisoned, tortured, etc. without recourse to U.S. courts to
challenge the legality of any kind of detention or treatment, no matter how
despicable or illegal that treatment may be. _Habeas corpus_ has protected the
rights of all residents imprisoned in English and United States territory, by
ensuring them appeal from abusive detention to the normal courts of the land,
under English and United States law for over 900 (that's nine hundred) years.
_Habeas corpus_ is the wellspring of all other legal protections we have
against abuse of the power to detain or imprison. For a substantial part of
the U.S. population, and for all foreigners, it is now gone. (It should be
noted that there has been traditionally and does need to be an exception for
aliens on an actual battlefield, otherwise the ability of our military to
fight would be severely compromised. But this legislation excludes _all_
aliens from _habeas_ protection, including the tens of millions of aliens
living peacefully within or peacefully visiting the U.S.).  
  
(2) Subjects all persons, including all U.S. citizens, at the whim of the
executive branch, to arbitrary detention, for indefinitely long periods of
time, as "enemy combatants." Although U.S. citizens still have an appeal to
normal courts via _habeas corpus_ , the tendency of recent courts to defer to
legislation over fundamental liberty rights disturbingly suggests a large free
hand for the executive branch, regardless of the party of the President, here
too.  
  
The vote was mostly along party lines; here are the exceptions (h/t Glenn
Greenwald):  

> Democrats in favor (12) - Carper (Del.), Johnson (S.D.), Landrieu (La.),
Lautenberg (N.J.), Lieberman (Conn.), Menendez (N.J), Nelson (Fla.), Nelson
(Neb.), Pryor(Ark.), Rockefeller (W. Va.), Salazar (Co.), Stabenow (Mich.).  
>  
> Republicans against (1) - Chafee (R.I.).

Sununu (R-NH) and Specter (R-PA) tried to reverse the suspension of _habeus
corpus_ _,_ but failing that voted for the final bill despite their
objections.

While the media focused attention on the more dramatic issue of what kinds of
torture or inhumane treatment would be considered technically legal under the
bill, for aliens this question is now moot, because, at the whim of the
executive branch, they will not be able to raise the issue in front of
anything but a military tribunal. And if they are not charged with any crime
they will not even get a military tribunal, because the bill allows for
indefinite and arbitrary detention of aliens defined, at the whim of the
executive branch, as "enemy combatants."

Marty Lederman also has a good description of this legislation.  
  
That this bill will be signed into law is now _fait accompli_. The only
recourse we have now is the ballot box this fall to punish the Representatives
and Senators who have surreptitiously stolen some of our most basic and hard-
won freedoms.

