BTW, credit where due dept., E.A. Wrigley and Eric Kerridge developed many of
the ideas I am discussing (Wrigley in at least a broad way wrt horses as a
source of farm work increasing farm labor productivity, Kerridge wrt progress
in pre-18th-century farming techniques) and wrote about it in their own way.
Clark, Overton, and many others have studied versions of the Malthusian real
wage (or per capita nutrition) vs. population graph. Langton studied the slow
substitution of horses for oxen in late medieval England and remarked on the
benefits of horse transport in expanding trade. I seem to be the first to have
recognized the lime/horse/coal virtuous cycle and the monotonic increase in
Britain's Malthusian isocline after at least 1260. The convential wisdom is
lack of clear progress before 1800 and magical transformation to rapid
progress after that time, resulting in a quixotic search for a magic bullet at
the end of the 18th century. But that comes from looking at too short time
intervals, which when plotted look like noise. To see the monotonic progress
before 1800 one needs to look at 80-year timespans or longer to minimize
exogenous natural variations in harvests (e.g. variations in weather and
pests).  
  
J. Thomas' comment on Egypt is apropos. The Nile spring flood provides a
number of crucial things. Water in a desert, obviously. But also good old NPK
(nitrogen, phosphorous, and potassium). And possibly soil conditioning. As it
happens, the Brits were clever enough to make their own little Niles:
"floating the watermeadows", i.e. diverting early spring rain-choked streams
and their effluvia into otherwise dry hay meadows with a sophisticated set of
ditches: restoring NPK (on top of some nitrogen already being provided in the
meadow by vetch or clover). And other interesting surprises. For example
little known to researchers of the "agricultural revolution", who've searched
in vain for a magic bullet around the magical year of 1800, they did indeed
import a crucial fertilizer starting in the early 19th century, and of course
the more well-known fertilizer imports at mid-century and thereafter, as well
as inventing the first artificial fertilizers. But the Agricultural Evolution
had a good head of steam far sooner than that. Probably even by the 15th
century, judging by the movement of the isocline, although records about what
specifically they were doing are alas rather poor until near the end of the
16th. (Kerridge thinks most of it was invented in the 16th and 17th centuries,
but some of that is probably selection bias -- that's when farmers were first
starting to become literate and writing extensively about their farms).  
  
Speaking of Agricultural Evolution, another interesting development was
breeding better horses based on the availability of unnaturally rich amounts
of fodder. Thus, for example the gigantic draft horses: the Suffolk Punch,
Shire Horse, the Norman Percheron (recall that Normandy was ruled by England
during most of the late Middle Ages, or perhaps we could say vice versa since
the Normans were the ruling class of England), and of course the Scottish
Clydesdales now of Christmas beer-ad fame. Beer was indeed one of many
products these horses hauled. That, AFAIK, exhausts the area of origin of the
large draft horse breeds (please correct me if I've missed any), demarcating
the centrality of Britain to the A.E. that pulled humanity out of the
Malthusian trap.

