The public interest (or public use) doctrine has been widely used in U.S. law
in areas ranging from constitutional law (including the Takings Clause,
substantive due process, and the First Amendment) to bankruptcy law and the
regulation of public utilities, telecommunications, and transportation
businesses in particular as well as of business generally. But this doctrine
has been radically changed in form over the years, until today it is a only a
mockery of its original form.  
  
From its origins in the medieval doctrines of seisin and feudal service, as
applied to private rights to exercise police powers or to charge taxes or
tolls, it was extended to apply to franchises and monopolies in general.
During the New Deal, the idea was preposterously expanded to justify even the
arbitrary and discriminatory regulation of every kind of property.  
  
In medieval times governmental jurisdiction was property. Like other property,
it was either derived by title ultimately from the king or by long use
(prescription). Like other property, it was governed by the doctrine of
seisin, or active and notorious possession. Often property , including land,
entailed, as a matter of obligation specified in charter (the deed under which
property was conditionally transferred) or as a matter of custom, obligations
such as military service, rent, or maintaining or using the property. In the
context of a franchise involving police powers, the doctrine of "non-user,"
justified as either seisin or implied feudal obligation, often imposed certain
procedural obligations -- for example to exercise the police power against
lawbreakers and to respect the right of trial by jury. The non-user doctrine
was, however, controversial, and owners of these intangible properties argued
that their franchises, even franchises to collect taxes and tolls or exercise
police powers, were purely private property for their private use.  
  
In 1237 King Henry II argued, in a letter to the Abbott of Peterborough, that
his grant to the abbott of local police powers was conditional on their being
exercised:  
  
  

> Since we ordered all the bailiffs in our realm to see that watches were kept
by night against the disturbers of our peace and commanded that the holders of
liberties [i.e. franchises] should see that this was observed in their
liberties, we marvel greatly that you in your liberty of Peterborough have
allowed homicide and theft to be committed, and have taken no steps to keep
our peace...We enjoin you therefore that, as you wish to retain your liberty,
you take care to deal with malefactors and peace breakers, so that it may
appear that you are a lover of peace, and that we may not have to lay our
hands upon your liberty because you have failed.

A more recent case that illustrated this debate is _Att.-Gen. v. Newdegate_
(King's Bench 1519). This case was to determine whether the franchises of
"infangthief" and "outfangthief" that had been deeded by the king to Newdegate
for his manor was forfeit back to the king due to "non-user." "Infangthief"
was the right to hang those who had committed a theft on the land and caught
red-handed on the land, and "outfangthief" was the right to hang such a thief
even if caught red-handed elsewhere.  
  
According to a report of the case, "the king's attorney showed that
[Newdegate] had not used it, and had also misused it, for he did not have
gallows..." Newdegate's attorney lamely explained that "his gallows were blown
down in the wind," but over a year had gone by and they were still down. He
argued that whatever the reason the gallows were blown down was irrelevant
because "non-user is neither a forfeiture nor finable because this is a
liberty [franchise] granted to him which he may use as he wishes, and it is
for his own advantage." Another words, he was arguing -- and it was a
plausible argument at the time -- that even a function we now consider a core
governmental function was purely a matter of private property. Even a police
force and a court did not in this view entail enough public interest to
justify common law regulation.  
  
However, Chief Justice Fyneux held that "this leet [i.e. the private court] is
granted for the common wealth as well as for the benefit of the party [owner],
and it must be used or else it is forfeit." Whereas in previous centuries this
kind of forfeiture proceeding, called a _quo warranto,_ was considered merely
a dispute over title to the franchise as either the king's private property or
the current operator's private property, now the franchise of monopoly police
power over an area was considered to have a pubic interest. It was this public
interest, not an implied feudal obligation to the king as grantor of the
franchiise, that now justified common law obligations and restrictions on the
use of a police powers franchise.  
  
In the late 17th century, Lord Chief Justice Hale, in his treatise _De
Portibus Maris (Concerning the Gates to the Sea)_ applied this doctrine to
franchises to take taxes or tolls. All rights to charge taxes or tolls were
originally the property of the king (the king's prerogative), but like the
king's jurisdiction it was often granted or owned by prescription by other
parties in the form of a franchise. Hale discussed the issue of what kind of
commercial enterprise constituted taking a "toll," and thus required an
intangible property right -- a franchise -- on top of the personal and real
property of the enterprise in order to legally operate the enterprise. If the
price was a toll, the enterprise was performed under franchise with a public
interest, and thus would be regulated by the common-law franchise doctrines of
non-user (the requirement of continual use for the public) and that the rate
charged be reasonable.  
  
Besides toll-roads and bridges, for Hale toll-taking included being the sole
operator of a port facility such as a wharf or a set of cranes, or the
operator of the sole ferry in an area. Hale justified this scope of public
interest by citing the Roman idea of _juris publica,_ under which the emperor,
rather than local authorities or private parties ( _juris privati_ ) had
jurisdiction over the ocean shoreline.  
  
These monopolistic situations with high avoidance costs were, however, still
plausible variants of the right to collect taxes or tolls. According to Hale,
when such a monopoly was either expressly a franchise granted by the king or
was a toll-taking monopoly owned by prescription, the owner of the monopoly
had to charge a reasonable rate. Hale describes such a franchise as "a right
privilege, that no man may set up a common ferry for all passengers without a
prescription time out of mind or a charter from the king. He may make a ferry
for his own use or the use of his family, but not for the common use of all
the king's subjects passing that way; because it doth in consequent tend to a
common charge, and is become a thing of public interest and use, and every man
for his passage pays a toll, which is a common charge, and every [such] ferry
ought to be under a public regulation, viz., that it give attendance at due
times, keep a boat in due order, and take but reasonable toll; for if he fail
in these he is finable." As long as the property right is equivalent to the
monopoly of taking a toll on a road, the property is "affected with a public
interest." This interest, however, terminates if competition arises. If the
situation is not or is no longer the equivalent of taking the toll -- i.e. if
it does not involve "all" the king's subjects who travel that way -- freedom
of contract (i.e. property rights in motion) must govern:  
  

> A man, for his own private advantage, may, in a port or town, set up a wharf
or crane, and may take what rates he and his customers can agree for cranage,
wharfage, housellage, pesage; for he doth no more than is lawful for any man
to do, viz., makes the most of his own. If the king or subject have a public
wharf, unto which all persons that come to that port must come and unlade or
lade their goods as for the purpose, because they are the wharves only
licensed by the king, or because there is no other wharf in that port, as it
may fall out where a port is newly erected, in that case there cannot be taken
arbitrary and excessive duties for cranage, wharfage, pesage, &c.; neither can
they be enhanced to an immoderate rate, but the duties must be reasonable and
moderate, though settled by the king's license or charter. For now the wharf
and crane and other conveniences are affected with a public interest, and they
cease to be _juris privati_ only; as if a man set out a street in new building
on his own land, it is now no longer bare private interest, but is affected by
the public interest.

Up to here the public interest was required to justify a common law
restriction on a franchise. In medieval and Renaissance times, on rare
occassions Parliamentary statutes, and much more commonly local lords and
guilds, regulated property in motion, with various oppressive or economically
dubious laws that fixed prices, set maximum wages, and the like. These
regulations were not considered part of the common law and were not justified
in terms of the public interest doctrine. However, in the U.S. the Fourteenth
Amendment was commonly held by legal scholars and judges to apply common law
restrictions to statutory law, and that included restricting regulation of
private property by the public interest doctrine as it had been explicated by
Hale. The Waite, Peckham, and Taft Courts all agreed that the public interest
doctrine restricted the ability both state and federal legislatures to
regulate private property, but in the process of applying the doctrine in this
way the Supreme Court ended up stretching it beyond all recognition, until it
just broke.  
  
This conflict between the legislative desire to regulate property and the
common law restrictions incorporated in the Fourteenth Amendment came to a
head little more than a decade after the ratification of that Amendment. The
common law doctrine of public interest was applied to restrict legislation,
but it was even in the first case stretched to allow legislation that was far
from regulation of any sort of private police power or toll-taking.  
  
In _Munn v. Illinois_ (US. Supreme Court 1877) the public interest doctrine
was rather dubiously extended to a set of grain elevator situated near a major
railroad hub in Chicago. These elevators sorted and stored grain and thus
played an important role in the shipment and trading of grain. Their
construction and operation had greatly expanded the ability of Midwest U.S.
farmers to market their products, but now the farmers had complained about the
high prices charged and successfully lobbied, via a political lobbying group
called the Grangers, for Illlinois to regulate the rates charged by the
elevators for storing grain.  
  
Munn's elevators did not comprise all (or even most) of the elevators near the
hub. There were several companies operating such elevators, albeit they had
been accused of collusion. Nevertheless, there is an economic rationale for
extending the public interest doctrine to what Professor Richard Epstein calls
network companies \-- companies like public utilities and railroads. Given the
exclusive contracts between railroads and the grain elevators, and anti-
scompetitive collusion between the elevator companies itself, the network
doctrine could plausibly be further extended from the railroads to the
elevators. Whether or not it was justifiable on policy grounds, _Munn_ was a
radical redefinition of the public interest doctrine. No longer was the
doctrine confined to performing governmental functions, i.e. running courts
and police forces and collecting taxes and tolls, when the rights to conduct
such activities were privately owned. Now the public interest doctrine applied
to purely commercial enterprises that were not purely competitive but were
associated with some uncompetitive practices or outcomes.  
  
The network or anticompetitive theory lasted for a little over seventy years,
but it was easy for courts to extend this doctrine, since no commercial
enterprise is purely competitive. Indeed, as Professor Epstein has described,
the Progressive and pro-New Deal judges thought highly regulated monopolies or
cartels were the ideal form of business for most sectors of the economy. In
_Nebbia v. New York_ (U.S. Supreme Court 1934) Justice Roberts declared that
the public interest doctrine justified almost arbitrary and discrimanatory
regulation of property:  

> The court has repeatedly sustained curtailment of enjoyment of private
property, in the public interest. The owner's rights may be subordinated to
the needs of other private owners whose pursuits are vital to the paramount
interests of the community. The state may control the use of property in
various ways; may prohibit advertising bill boards except of a prescribed size
and location, or their use for certain kinds of advertising; may in certain
circumstances authorize encroachments by party walls in cities; may fix the
height of buildings, the character of materials, and methods of construction,
the adjoining area which must be left open, and may exclude from residential
sections offensive trades, industries and structures likely injuriously to
affect the public health or safety; or may establish zones within which
certain types of buildings or businesses are permitted and others excluded.
And although the Fourteenth Amendment extends protection to aliens as well as
citizens, a state may for adequate reasons of policy exclude aliens altogether
from the use and occupancy of land [citations omitted].

In terms of what local lords and legislatures had actually regulated over the
course of history this was accurate. In the context of the history of
franchise law, on which Hale's public interest doctrine was based, and which
the Fourteenth Amendment had been held to incorporate, but which Justice
Roberts had forgotten, this interpretation of the public interest doctrine was
absurd. "Public interest" now refered, not to coercive police powers, not to
toll-taking, not to toll-like monopolies, not to businesses with network
externalities, but simply to the ubiquitous condition of scarcity, used in
_NBC v. U.S._ (U.S. Supreme Court 1943) even to deny First Amendment claims
against content-related FCC regulations:  

> The facilities of radio are limited and therefore precious; they cannot be
left to wasteful use without detriment to the public interest.

The Waite Court's application of the doctrine to network-like businesses
generally, including not just railroads but also semi-monopolistic depots
standing beside railroads, had already stetched the doctrine well beyond toll-
taking proper. Now the doctrine was simply smashed down altogether by the New
Deal hurricane.

