In his novel Cat’s Cradle, science fiction writer Kurt Vonnegut postulated
“Ice-9.” Ice-9 was a form of water that was frozen at room temperature and
catalyzed any normal water it came in contact with into more crystals of
Ice-9. Once released into the environment, it froze all water, including us.
Eric Drexler in the 1980s raised the specter of nano-robots that made copies
of themselves and ate everything in their path: "gray goo." A wide variety of
similar hypothetical disasters have since been given referred to as some sort
of "goo."  
  
Self-replicating chemicals are not merely hypothetical: since Cat's Cradle,
scientists have discovered some real-world example of crystals that seed the
environment, converting other forms (polymorphs) of the crystal into their
own. The population of the original polymorph diminishes as it is converted
into the new form: it is a “disappearing polymorph.” In 1996 Abbott Labs began
manufacturing the new anti-AIDS drug ritonavir. In 1998 a more stable
polymorph appeared in the American manufacturing plant. It converted the old
form of the drug into a new polymorph, Form 2, that did not fight AIDS nearly
as well. Abbott’s plant was contaminated, and it could no longer manufacture
effective rintonavir. Abbott continued to successfully manufacture the drug in
its Italian plant. Then American scientists visited, and that plant too was
contaminated was contaminated and could henceforth only produce the
ineffective Form 2. Apparently the scientists had carried some Form 2 crystals
into the plant on their clothing.  
  
Another instance of the “disappearing polymorph” may be the anti-depressant,
Paxil (U.S. brand name for the chemical paroxetine hydrochloride). No, self-
replicating Paxil doesn’t naturally spread into our brains and make people
happy for free. It's not "happy goo." On the contrary, self-replicating Paxil
converted, according to one of the parties in the ensuing lawsuit, an old, and
now off-patent, form of Paxil into a new, patented form of Paxil. Once the new
form, the hemihydrate form of Paxil, was created, its crystals started
floating about, converting small fractions of the old form, anhydrous Paxil,
into hemihydrate. Both forms of the drug work equally well as an anti-
depressant, but it became impossible to manufacture the off-patent anhydrate
without some of it being converted into the patented form. Call it "patent
goo."  
  
Apotex, a generic drug manufacturer, was all set up to manufacture the off-
patent anhydrous generic Paxil when it discovered small fractions of it were
being converted into the hemihydrate. They couldn’t remove the contamination.
Smithkline, owner of the patent on the hemihydrate, sued them for patent
infringement. Apotex argued that the hemihydrate form occurred naturally, so
that Smithkline’s patent was invalid. Smithkline argued that it was a
disappearing polymorph, that the hemihydrate form had not existed before they
had created it in their labs, and that it was up to Apotex to remove the
hemihydrate from its product or pay it a royalty. Apotex was unable to remove
the hemihydrate and unwilling to pay a royalty.  
  
Judge Richard Posner heard this case in the trial court and wrote an opinion
that contains a good explanation of the self-replicating Paxil controversy.
The Federal Circuit heard the appeal and decided that Smithkline’s patent on
the hemihydrate was invalid as “inherently anticipated” because anhydrate
naturally converts into hemihydrate. Normally, anticipation would require an
actual reference describing the claimed chemical structure (in patent lingo
that the hemihydrate was "taught in the prior art"). But Judge Rader held that
inherent anticipation occurs when, more likely than not, an operation that is
taught in the prior art would result in the claimed chemical. The anhydrate
which was taught in the prior art would more than likely result in natural
creation of some hemihydrate. Judge Gajarsa in concurrence argued that the
drug was discovered not invented, making it unpatentable subject matter.
Gajarsa’s opinion may have inspired the United States Supreme Court to raise
the subject matter issue on its own (i.e., it had not been argued by the
parties to the case) in _Metabolite_. The Supreme Court is considering whether
to take the appeal on the self-replicating Paxil case as well.

