Daniel, you may be right that one can't much control which part of earth one
is shading. I was getting quite raw at that point of my account when I
suggested you could substantially shade the poles but not the the equator or
vice versa. :-) I'll have to go re-check that part of my optics research. The
rest of my optics can be verified by reading at least one of the other
proposals (e.g. that of Roger Angel) that also uses refraction instead of
reflection.  
  
The vast area we need to cover, and thus the vast mass and bulk of the
structures, is why it makes much more sense to manufacture and transport the
blinds using cheap native materials and transport in a low-power microgravity
regime instead of launching them from deep gravity well of earth. Also the
material is important: organics, but not glass, can be made gossamer-thin
which means you can use as raw materials ice, from comets or (if possible)
asteroids, rather than making glass from the moon as another proposal does.
(Even with glass transport costs are much lower if the glass is made from a
near-earth asteroid than lunar material).  
  
Graham, you raise an interesting point about the strategic importance of the
Earth-Sun L1. Legally it's a natural monopoly of the kind that would have been
called a "franchise" under old English common law -- like owning the only
bridge across a river. (In the U.S. at least we still call cable and water
company local monopolies "franchises"). Legally  
since nobody can compete with a natural monopoly, a franchise had to sell at a
reasonable price and provide service to all customers willing to pay that
price. A reasonable price here would be some thermal equivalent to carbon
dioxide emission rights sold on a market, or a similar share of a carbon tax.
Reasonable service has to include not shading the earth more or less than what
the sold carbon rights imply, i.e. not more or less than to make up for the
extra carbon dioxide emissions that can be compensated for by the shading. If
there's already an earthsiinde carbon dioxide emissions market that allows for
carbon dioxide sinks to issue extra rights, "reasonable price" issue is simply
one of determining the equivalent in carbon dioxide units, then selling the
extra rights on the existing market.  
  
Earth-Sun L1 is a strategic chokepoint for the earth's sunlight, somewhat like
Gibraltar for the Atlantic-Mediterranean sea trade or Malacca for the China-
India trade. Recall that historically Portugal gained about a century in the
sun as the first worldwide empire by taking control of these two strategic
points.  
  
This raises the twin military issues of (1) how to protect this legal regime
from terrorism, extortion, or other threats, including (2) how to protect the
legal regime from said military itself. This, as they say in math textbooks,
is left as an exercise for the student. :-)

