The long reach of _habeas corpus_ was reaffirmed by the U.S. Supreme Court in
_Hamdi v. Rumsfeld_ , in 2004, when it ruled that U.S. citizens detained in
Guatanamo Bay, a U.S. military base on long-term lease from Cuba, were on U.S.
territory and therefore have a right to plea to a U.S. federal court for
_habeas corpus_ and thereby enforce certain minimal liberty rights under the
Due Process Clause. The companion case, _Rasul v. Bush,_ declared that aliens
(non-citizens) held at an overseas U.S. military base also have this right.
However, recently passed legislation, the Military Commissions Act, has
suspended _habeas corpus_ protection for all aliens, even the tens of millions
of aliens visiting or residing inside the United States proper. It also
jeopardizes many of the legal protections U.S. citizens have against arbitrary
detainment once we have invoked _habeus corpus._  
  
In _Hamdi_ Justice Scalia, unusually joined by Justice Stevens, quoted William
Blackstone's 18th century legal treatise, parts of which had also been quoted
by Alexander Hamilton in _Federalist_ #84:

> "Of great importance to the public is the preservation of this personal
liberty: for if once it were left in the power of any, the highest, magistrate
to imprison arbitrarily whomever he or his officers thought proper ... there
would soon be an end of all other rights and immunities. ... To bereave a man
of life, or by violence to confiscate his estate, without accusation or trial,
would be so gross and notorious an act of despotism, as must at once convey
the alarm of tyranny throughout the whole kingdom. But confinement of the
person, by secretly hurrying him to gaol, where his sufferings are unknown or
forgotten; is a less public, a less striking, and therefore a more dangerous
engine of arbitrary government. ...  
>  
> "To make imprisonment lawful, it must either be, by process from the courts
of judicature, or by warrant from some legal officer, having authority to
commit to prison; which warrant must be in writing, under the hand and seal of
the magistrate, and express the causes of the commitment, in order to be
examined into (if necessary) upon a _habeas corpus_. If there be no cause
expressed, the gaoler is not bound to detain the prisoner. For the law judges
in this respect, ... that it is unreasonable to send a prisoner, and not to
signify withal the crimes alleged against him." 1 W. Blackstone, Commentaries
on the Laws of England 132-133 (1765) (hereinafter Blackstone).  
>

Scalia added:

> It is unthinkable that the Executive could render otherwise criminal grounds
for detention noncriminal merely by disclaiming an intent to prosecute, or by
asserting that it was incapacitating dangerous offenders rather than punishing
wrongdoing. Cf. _Kansas v. Hendricks_ , 521 U. S. 346, 358 (1997) ("A finding
of dangerousness, standing alone, is ordinarily not a sufficient ground upon
which to justify indefinite involuntary commitment").

Both Scalia and Stevens held that this applied to military detentions of U.S.
citizens as much as to imprisonment by civilian courts. However Scalia, but
not Stevens, made a strong distinction between U.S. citizens and aliens.
"Citizens aiding the enemy have been treated as traitors subject to the
criminal process," and thus when imprisoned entitled to invoke the federal
courts via _habeas corpus._  
  
The Great Writ has been often been suspended in areas and periods of warfare,
allowing armies to capture enemies _en masse_ without incurring legal
overhead, but such suspensions have often led to unjust deprivations of
liberty. Liberty, as well as life, property, and truth, is a common casualty
of war. Without _habeas corpus_ severe political oppression and deprivation of
liberty through the practice of disappearing becomes all too easy.  
  
Blackstone wrote about the conditions under which the writ might
constitutionally be suspended:

> "And yet sometimes, when the state is in real danger, even this [i.e.,
executive detention] may be a necessary measure. But the happiness of our
constitution is, that it is not left to the executive power to determine when
the danger of the state is so great, as to render this measure expedient. For
the parliament only, or legislative power, whenever it sees proper, can
authorize the crown, by suspending the _habeas corpus_ act for a short and
limited time, to imprison suspected persons without giving any reason for so
doing... . In like manner this experiment ought only to be tried in case of
extreme emergency; and in these the nation parts with it[s] liberty for a
while, in order to preserve it for ever." 1 Blackstone 132.

Among other constitutional problems with the recently passed legislation, the
Military Commissions Act, suspending _habeas corpus_ for aliens, is that it
has done so until repealed by Congress, rather than "for a short and limited
time." It's also absurd to argue, as some have, that the U.S. currently in a
state of "invasion" or "rebellion" as required by the Constitution:

> The privilege of the Writ of Habeas Corpus shall not be suspended, unless
when in Cases of Rebellion or Invasion the public Safety may require it. Art.
I, ยง9, cl. 2.

In _Eisentrager v. Forrestal, _ the Court had held that German citizens
captured in China during World War II and imprisoned in Germany did not have
the right to invoke _habeas corpus_ in U.S. federal courts. The special
conditions quoted in _Eisentrager_ were as follows: the defendant " (a) is an
enemy alien; (b) has never been or resided in the United States; (c) was
captured outside of our territory and there held in military custody as a
prisoner of war; (d) was tried and convicted by a Military Commission sitting
outside the United States; (e) for offenses against laws of war committed
outside the United States; (f) and is at all times imprisoned outside the
United States." Although _Eisentrager_ was decided by a court similar to the
Court that decided the notorious case of _Korematsu,_ legitimatizing wholesale
confiscation of property and internment in concentration camps of innocents in
wartime, it does set at least some minimal bounds on what alien combatants may
be arbitrarily derived of their liberty.  
  
As Justice Stevens wrote in his majority opinion in _Rasul:_

> this Court has recognized the federal courts' power to review applications
for _habeas_ relief in a wide variety of cases involving Executive detention,
in wartime as well as in times of peace. The Court has, for example,
entertained the habeas petitions of an American citizen who plotted an attack
on military installations during the Civil War, _Ex parte Milligan_ , 4 Wall.
2 (1866), and of admitted enemy aliens convicted of war crimes during a
declared war and held in the United States, _Ex parte Quirin_ , 317 U. S. 1
(1942), and its insular possessions, _In re Yamashita_ , 327 U. S. 1 (1946).  
>

Stevens distinguished the facts in _Rasul_ from those in _Eisentrager:_  

> Petitioners in these cases differ from the _Eisentrager_ detainees in
important respects: They are not nationals of countries at war with the United
States, and they deny that they have engaged in or plotted acts of aggression
against the United States; they have never been afforded access to any
tribunal, much less charged with and convicted of wrongdoing; and for more
than two years they have been imprisoned in territory over which the United
States exercises exclusive jurisdiction and control.

In concurrence, Justice Kennedy distinguished the Guantanamo Bay detentions
from those in _Eisentrager_ as follows:  

> The facts here are distinguishable from those in Eisentrager in two critical
ways, leading to the conclusion that a federal court may entertain the [
_habeas corpus_ ] petitions. First, Guantanamo Bay is in every practical
respect a United States territory, and it is one far removed from any
hostilities....The second critical set of facts is that the detainees at
Guantanamo Bay are being held indefinitely, and without benefit of any legal
proceeding to determine their status. In Eisentrager, the prisoners were tried
and convicted by a military commission of violating the laws of war and were
sentenced to prison terms. Having already been subject to procedures
establishing their status, they could not justify "a limited opening of our
courts" to show that they were "of friendly personal disposition" and not
enemy aliens. [citation omitted] Indefinite detention without trial or other
proceeding presents altogether different considerations. It allows friends and
foes alike to remain in detention. It suggests a weaker case of military
necessity and much greater alignment with the traditional function of habeas
corpus. Perhaps, where detainees are taken from a zone of hostilities,
detention without proceedings or trial would be justified by military
necessity for a matter of weeks; but as the period of detention stretches from
months to years, the case for continued detention to meet military exigencies
becomes weaker.

During the debate over the Military Detentions Act some Senators, such as
Arlen Specter (R-PA), argued that the _habeas corpus_ provision of this Act
was unconstitutional, but then, pathologically, voted for it anyway. In the
early years of the Constitution, it was Congress, not the Courts, who were
mainly responsible for making sure legislation stayed within constitutional
bounds, and constitutional issues were often debated in Congress and were
considered the most decisive issues. Voting for an admittedly unconstitutional
Act was a highly irresponsible act. We have a seriously paranoid and unstable
situation with Washington D.C. culture and it cannot be predicted how the
highly divided Court with two new conservative membes will vote. Not just the
Supreme Court, and not just the Executive, but all U.S. citizens, including
Congress, are responsible for obeying the Constitution and ensuring that it is
obeyed by our leaders.

