Robin: _I get that you hate coercive governance, and want me to rail against
it, and refuse to offer it any assistance, but I didn't discuss that because
it isn't directly relevant._  
This grossly mischaracterizes my position and my reason for raising the
subject. In fact I have written that coercion is quite necessary for legal
procedure. (Notice that I am providing links rather than vague general claims
that I dealt with this issue somewhere, and you have to root through all my
old obscure papers to find where I did). My objection here is not ideological,
it is that when you add coercion to an economic transaction, the outcome is
usually quite different than a voluntary transaction. You can't model them the
same way. Standard economics assumes voluntary transactions and I have found
that economists usually make gross errors when modelling coercive
transactions. You are sweeping this crucial factor entirely under the rug in
the explanations you've written for the general public -- if you are also, as
it's quite reasonable to suspect, neglecting this crucial factor in your
papers, the output from these Holy Writs, without having read which Thou Shall
Not Comment on the straightforward political proposal allegedly justified
therein, the conclusions reached by these vaunted works are likely to be
wrong.  
  
As for those publications, I have read your *public* publications on futarchy,
i.e. those written for the general intelligent public and not just for
specialists who share your particular set of hidden economic assumptions. I've
also read enough of your technical papers on other subjects to know that this
is not a very worthwhile way to figure out what you're up to. Like most
academics, you are very poor at stating your assumptions -- you have a set of
hidden or tacit assumptions and hidden special meanings of words, presumably
shared with the journal referees, which cannot be readily reverse-engineered
by the intelligent layman. So, like most of the supporters of your proposal, I
read your clearer restatements, in the form of blog posts and summaries. In
the case of futarchy, the proposal you are making is clear enough, it is the
justifications that are obscure. And in your statements to the general public
from what I've seen you have not dealt at all with coercion or moral hazard,
nor have you answered any of my objections here. If you had seriously dealt
with these problems before it shoudn't be so hard for you to answer my
objections now, but instead all we're getting from you is _ad hominem_
argument.

