Clayton, Friedman is still assuming that all the contracts, except the
"occasional violence" which he proceeds to ignore, are the positive-sum
voluntary contracts assumed by other economists when they use the Coase
Theorem or the theory of bilateral monopoly. The disproof that the bilateral
theory monopoly applies here is similar to that for the Coase theorem:
bilateral monoply theory assumes voluntary transactions yet purports (as
Friedman applies it) to work in a world where opportunities and incentives for
coercive transactions are ubiquitous. The assumptions are contradictory and
prove the application of bilateral monopoly theory in this situation (and
analogous analyses of politics or law) to be false.  
  
You and Friedman both need to go back and read my original article above. The
negative-sum game is basic to the problem: it is not a mere "transaction cost"
or "occasional violence" that can be swept under the rug in order to invoke
the convenient authority of economic theories that assume voluntary
transactions. Now that I have pointed out the problem in a very clear fashion,
one has to be a complete logical illiterate to believe that one can invoke
economic theories that assume voluntary transactions to prove that coercion is
not a problem.  
  
_Each knows that the other would prefer even a rather unfavorable set of legal
rules to no agreement at all._  
  
Nice try to get out of a jam, but it is extremely far off the mark. Both
parties would prefer to extort the maximum possible from the other party at
the least cost to themselves. That is the negative-sum game that is basic to
situations not already governed by at least tort law. You and Friedman are
jumping through some amazing hoops to avoid confronting this problem.  
  
"teh internet": _the amount of money the railroad will be able to extort from
the farmers is bounded from above by the cost of switching to non-flammable
crops (clover in Friedman's example)._  
  
This is of course nonsense. If one method of coercion becomes too expensive,
there are usually many alternatives available. In this case, the railroad
could switch to spraying the field with herbicide. Or it could wait until the
field is harvested into hay and send in an arsonist to set fire to the hay.
Under the Coaseian assumption that any prior allocation of legal rights is
possible, the legality of any of these acts are possible prior allocations of
legal rights. The fact of the matter is that when Coase, Stigler, et. al.
worked out these examples they were already assuming the beneficial effects of
tort and property law as well as rights allocations within these laws that
ruled out such coercive acts: a hidden assumption that contradicts the overt
claim, necessary to Friedman's reasoning, that they they proved the Coase
Theorem for _any_ prior legal allocations. Since externalities are often not
readily separated from coercion, the Coase Theorem is false: it does not apply
in a world where coercion is possible. There is no easy way to apply it to
negative externalities which usually come bundled with opportunities to make
coercive threats. When dealing with externalities problems, one must confront
_both_ coercion and transaction cost problems. Lowering bargaining and
enforcement costs may well cause _more_ harm when the bargaining is over a
negative-sum game.

