patrick, one has to take into account the implied growth for demand for
dollars over the same period. The strong market for U.S. Treasuries reflects
continued growing demand for dollars, even if that demand is largely from
sovereign funds buying dollar-denominated debts. I thus suspect the real
interest rate on 30-year Treasuries, nominally 4.5%, is about 0%, reflecting
excess growth of dollar supply over demand of 5.5%/year (given your figure of
dollar supply growth of 10%/year). The nearer term Treasuries have slightly
negative real rates, and Fed Funds are about -1.5%, which is enough to be
highly inflationary, for the reasons you cite (the ongoing arbitrage of
borrowing dollars to buy hard assets). We need a real interest rate of 3-6% on
Fed Funds to stabilize the dollar. But any such analysis is sheer guesswork.  
  
Now you could argue that the demand for dollars is being fed artificially by
government debt and sovereign funds irrationally investing in that debt, but
that's a different argument from saying that the real interest rate is -6%
today. Per above I believe that the U.S. debt, though economically very
harmful to ourselves and our children, is sustainable.  
  
As for current account deficits cited by Brad Setser, I wonder how accurate
they are. Do they take into account the vast foreign revenues from services
(e.g. Google's booming overseas ad revenue) that are not counted as "exports"?  
  
 _What we are seeing is a pattern of people using assets to hold savings, and
then that asset getting over produced (eg internet stocks, housing in
exburbs), prices dropping, then monetary demand dropping because the asset
cannot hold savings._  
  
This is a great observation, except I disagree with the last, because people
keep finding more things to invest dollars in (most recently commodities and
Treasuries).  
  
 _Only the assets that have limited supply (commodities, property in areas
with heavy zoning restrictions) can hold savings long term._  
  
Even these can get soft, because over the long run commodities can be
substituted and many people will move from high-price to low-price areas, or
just not move into the high-price area in the first place when they get out of
school.  
  
Also, there is moral hazard in commodity derivatives just as with credit
derivatives, and just as there was in gold-backed fractional reserve banking.
I suspect housing will make a comeback.  
  
 _The only other solution is to increase the transaction costs of using
commodities as alternative currencies_  
  
This would be highly destructive, but alas there are many rabid politicians
running around proposing just this.  
  
FWIW here's my Extremely Uncustomized Recommended Portfolio:  
  
50% stocks  
30% real estate  
20% commodities and collectibles  
  
Only one customization: if you have major net expenditures coming up in the
next 10 years (kids going to college, retirement, etc.), over half of the
stocks should be sold and replaced with bonds and commodities as follows:  
  
20% stocks  
30% real estate  
30% commodities and collectibles  
20% bonds  
  
Preferably you should live in the real estate and enjoy the collectibles as a
hobby, so that you get utility as well as return from the investment.  
  
Of course, real portfolios should be highly customized to your own preferences
and expected future expenditures.

