There are may examples of coercive political power both today and in history
that don't fit in to the academic idea of "the state" as a "monopoly of
force." Federalism, separation of powers, and many examples of legally "taking
the law into one's own hands" are just three categories of examples. Here, we
look at another, mostly forgotten but once ubiquitous category from history:
political power wielded by private individuals or commercial organizations,
with profits or the equivalent as a primary incentive of the organization.

These were entities quite different from both modern governments and modern
economic corporations. These wielders of coercive power for profit combined
the efficiency of private enterprise with the often ruthless coercion of
government.

In the Roman Republic there were a number of corporations that were granted
various kinds of political power. The most notorious were the _publicani_ ,
the ruthlessly efficient tax farmers. Tax farmers were private contractors to
governments or other coercively funded entities (such as colonial
corporations, examples of which we will see below). Through history tax
farmers have been famed and reviled for their efficient operations and
ruthless treatment of taxpayers. The _publicani_ , for example, deployed
crucifixion and other forms of torture to extract financial information from
their victims.

Tax farmers were, however, at least more honest than modern tax collectors.
Tax farmers knew who their customers were -- governments or other coercively
funded organizations. Like any other collection agency their customers were
the creditors, not the debtors. They never propounded the pathetic mythology
of some modern government tax collectors that their quite involuntary debtors,
rather than their respective governments, are their "customers".

It is not well understood by Romanist moderns that monarchy was based, not
primarily on Burkean romantic worship or the divine right of kings, but rather
on the political property rights of an individual and his heirs. The laws of
inheritance for a monarch were usually the same as those for land.
Furthermore, at most places and times the monarch did not have a monopoly of
political power, but rather by prescription or grant many other entities --
nobles, burghers, and corporations chief among these -- also held political
property rights. Modern "titles" are the shell of a system that once involved
extensive political property rights. As I described in my paper "Jurisdiction
as Property", the most basic aspects of the medieval and Renaissance English
legal system -- from which much of the modern writs, common law, and
constitutions of England, Commonwealth and United States legal systems are
derived -- were the laws that defined the rights and trespasses involving
political property.

After a long lapse from the records of history, the Roman corporate form
reanimated in the form both of independent cities -- municipal corporations
that gave rise to republics -- and in forms like the Genovese _maone_ and
similar organizations in other late medieval Italian republics. The _maone_
issued securities that acted much like stock shares, effectively paying
dividends, although technically they were treated as debt instruments rather
than ownership shares. They engaged in colonial conquests and administration,
tax farming, or other subsets of governmental functions. A fuller account of
the maone and their role in originating the modern corporation can be found
here.

 _Sir Francis Drake, commander of joint-stock navies._

There is also a long history of armed forces for profit -- of mercenaries,
private escorts, privateering, and sheer piracy. The main colonial companies,
such as the East and West India companies of Britain, the Netherlands, and
other colonial powers, deployed their own naval forces to protect their own
fleets and on occasion to attack rival shipping. Among the first English
joint-stock corporations were the temporary joint-stock companies set up by
Drake and Hawkins to trade with the Spanish colonies (from the Spanish point
of view to smuggle) and raid the Spanish gold and silver fleets.

Despite their profit motive, which put a premium on trading and raiding rather
than defense, these private navies also successfully defended England. The
battle of against the Spanish Armada was won, not by the Royal Navy (which did
not yet exist), but by the joint-stock naval corporations of Drake and
Hawkins. Drake's circumnavigation of the globe in 1577-80 was also funded by a
joint-stock company created for the purpose. The profits came from
trading/smuggling and privateering against the Spanish Main.

Most of the British colonies overseas (and many of those of Brtitain's rivals)
were organized as corporations for profit, and most of these at one point or
another issued stock. The political consequences of such corporate colonies
were highly controversial and highly varied. In America, the corporate
charters guarunteed "the rights of Englishmen"; that and a large frontier (and
thus low exit costs) produced a very libertarian political system. Some
American charters, such as the Massachusetts Bay Company, guarunteed that all
freeholders of land within the corporation's land grant could vote on the
corporate by-laws, which effectively became the laws of the land. This set the
stage for two of the most distinctive characteristics of the later United
States -- both its democracy (in contrast to their status in England, most
early English settlers in America were landowners ("freeman") and thus
entitled by charter to vote) and its written constitutions enforced by
judicial review (because the charter -- in modern corporate parlance the
articles of incorporation -- trumps mere legislation -- in modern corporate
parlance the by-laws).


 _Charter of the Massachusetts Bay Company, 1628_


In Africa, by sharp contrast, the main business was slaving, and the charters
of the African corporations authorized them to wield martial law, which they
did with ruthlessnes. The most infamous of these African companies operated,
however, after the era of individual slavery had ended. Instead of overt
slavery the Congo Free State instituted a system effectively worse than
slavery -- a tax system based on in-kind payments of rubber. The barbarous
cruelty of the resulting system was immortalized in Joseph Conrad's _Heart of
Darkness_.

In between these political extremes, the East India Companies and many other
colonial companies operated across the globe, at first assisting local
entities in military, tax collecton, and administration, but eventually taking
over these governmental functions and reaping often immense profits as a
result. They brought literacy and very efficient and modern administration but
also often engaged in an exploitation that was widely percieved as so ruthless
that the East India Company became profoundly unpopular and was eventually
nationalized.

Administration by the colonial companies was usually far more efficient, for
example in terms of European manpower deployed, than the later administration
by the governments of European powers when these companies were nationalized
in the 19th and 20th centuries. By the end of the 18th century these companies
had become highly unpopular in government circles. The rise of democracy and
the Romanist ideology of the monolithic state spelled their doom. Ideologists
and scholars as varied as Adam Smith, Edmund Burke, and Karl Marx railed
against the depradations of the colonial corporations. For Marx these
epitomized the evil of capitalism generally, whereas Smith and Burke were
careful to distinguish the wielding of coercive political power, which they
found particularly destructive in this form, from the wielding of voluntary
economic power, which they found highly beneficial.  
