To clarify, I am dividing _substantive_ rights into positive and negative.
Negative rights are "rights to be left alone" (using that term more broadly
than Brandeis to include, for example, the tort of battery and the right to
quiet enjoyment of one's property) against any other individual or corporate
entity including governments. Positive rights imply positive dutie(s) to act
among other persons. For example, the supposed right to be rescued is not a
traditional common law right (despite strong utilitarian arguments in favor of
it), because it is a positive right. Under traditional common law the only way
to create positive rights was by personal consent, usually contract.  
  
Procedural rights are there to protect natural, constitutional, and common law
substantive rights (negative rights) and statutory rights (which are sometimes
positive in nature).  
  
Our topic is the U.S. constitution and how certain broad phrases in it
("rights...retained by the people," "life, liberty, and property," "privileges
and immunities," "equal protection," etc.) are to be interepreted. I am
stressing original meaning -- what the ratifiers in 1789-91 and the 1860's
understood by these phrases. (The standard approach to interpreting almost any
legal text, of course, is how the text was understood by those who were
authorized to enact it into law).  
  
Thus, under the U.S. Constituion we are somewhat protected against those who
would use the law to impose on others duties to act by limiting the creation
of positive rights to consent (especially contract) and democratically enacted
statute. Courts may not impose positive rights by traditional common law or by
interpreting the U.S. Constitution.  
  
Obviously some states (largely long since the founding of the U.S.) and
foreign nations have some more recently enacted positive rights, the "right to
education" being the most common. The constitutions of communist countries
were or are full of such supposed rights, which didn't prevent tens of
millions of their citizens from starving to death due to government
confiscation of food. Positive rights are an invitation for the government to
violating negative rights on a very large scale.  
  
Broadly worded positive rights are inherently ambiguous and socially
destrucitve. What broadly worded positive rights actually mean has been the
subject of acrimonious and endless debate (e.g. how much can New Hampshire cut
taxes before the reduced funding to its schools violates that state's
constitutional "right" to education, and who has standing to sue to overturn
the tax cuts?)  
  
Public services are not legal rights unless statutes have given citizens an
action in court against the government if those services are not provided (or
perhaps even if their provision falls below some standard of service). The
post-Cold War trend is to expressly disclaim that any such positive rights are
being created, since that would give the courts _carte blanche_ to prevent
budget cuts when funding is more urgently needed elsewhere, and might even
give rise to courts raising taxes as they did in New Hampshire.  
  
Common law and natural rights are crucial for interpreting the meaning of the
Bill of Rights because these were the the kinds of rights that motivated the
passage of those Amendments (see Madison et. al.) In particular, the 9th
Amendment refers to other kinds of common law or natural (and thus negative)
rights that are not expressly enumerated in the other Amendments.  
  
Your comment on the nature of property rights is interesting, but will have to
be the topic for another day. The short answer is to read Locke, not Hume, and
that common law property rights are natural rights, not arbitrary creations of
the government. For example, patents and copyrights are not natural property
rights, but real property and rights in tangible goods and negotiable
instruments usually are. (Note that none of these rights originated in the
modern state; for example negotiable instruments law was the creation
primarily of medieval merchant guilds). The positivist view you impute to Hume
was alien to the founders who strongly believed in common law and natural
rights.

