 _All transactions that ideal agents make are technically voluntary_  
  
"Ideal" only in a very idealistic moral sense that depends on a sophisticated
legal system to have a basis in social reality. Otherwise it's nowhere close
to reality. How many transaction in nature are voluntary? It's a dog-eat-
rabbit and a rabbit-eat-grass world, and that can be only changed with
something highly artificial and non-obvious to nature, e.g. a highly
sophisticated system of tort and property law.  
  
Market and related transactional models of economics rest assume such
voluntary transactions, and thus assume a sophisticated legal system, which is
why I generally reject them, at least out-of-the-box, as explanatory devices
for phenomena operating outside that legal regime, including explaining the
nature or origins of that regime.  
  
Rational self-interest I do take as a far more generally applicable assumption
of economics, but that is an extremely different thing than supposing all
actions are voluntary.  
  
Another useful model is the Byzantine or security model, where you expect and
protect against the worst possible behavior your fellow humans could possibly
dish out.  
  
Neither the rational self-interest model nor, obviously, the Byzantine model,
have the corollary of voluntary transactions. That requires far more, e.g.
that highly evolved legal system.  
  
Generally I'm willing to accept the rational self-interest model, although the
pure Byzantine security standpoint is sometimes also valuable if it's hard to
judge what would be in their self-interest or if it's probably in their self-
interest to attack.  
  
In the above analysis, I've been using the rational self-interest model,
although if we pursued it further we'd need to use the security model to
determine the credibility of threats and outcomes of what we might call
"mutual exchanges of externality" :-)  
  
 _If everyone could spend as much money as they wanted (but lose utility
proportional to the amount of money spent) the mafia would go away._  
  
The premise is hopelessly imaginary, and the conclusion is wrong anyway. Some
preferences are relative, and thus insatiable, especially those satisfied by
zero- or negative-sum power games, and so the mafia would keep on collecting
regardless of how much it already had. The same applies to the music store,
although without preexisting legal rights they (or the doctor, or both) would
end up using guns instead of mere guitar amps.  
  
(This latter also responds to Daniel's point).

