Nick Szabo's Papers and Concise Tutorials Copyright (c) 2006, 2007 by Nick
Szabo  
Marshall McLuhan, Elizabeth Eisenstein and others have described the
importance of the "printing revolution" to European developments such the
Reformation, Renaissance, and science. According to Eisenstein, printing
finally foiled the entropy that had destroyed the vast majority of written
works since ancient times. Printing also enlarged the bookshelves of scholars
all over Europe: by a factor of fifty or more by the middle of the 16th
century.

I'd go even farther than Eisenstein. Printing soon brought literacy to vast
numbers of people (eventually to the vast majority of us). Printing,
especially printing in newly standardized vernaculars, changed the very
consciousness of people, and turned a small corner of the world, Western
Europe, into a culture that in many ways conquered the world. Widespread
decentralized printing and the accompanying book markets, new schools, and
rise of literacy gave rise to a new form of consciousness -- book
consciousness.

Colombus was among the first generation of navigators who had been reading
avidly and widely since a child. On his bookshelf was Marco Polo's Travels. On
his voyages he carried maps made by geographers who had been literate
sincethey were children, and he carried astronomical tables that had been
printed widely across Europe. These tables had been made by a Hungarian-
Italian mathematician whose bookshelf was full of ancient Greek science and
mathematics. Such information had been rather inferior and far less available
just a few decades before.

With the easy conquest by tiny Portugal of Asia's vast and ancient sea trade
routes, rapidly literizing Western Europeans were by the early 16th century
demonstrating a vast superiority in naval affairs. In navigation as in battle
officers using accurate charts and astronomical tables were at a premium.
(Europeans did not have quite such good luck on land against the Turks).
Western Europeans would retain completely uncontested (except among each
other) naval superiority on the world's oceans until the Japanese victory over
Russia in the early 20th century. The Japanse by then had long since taken up
printing and had a very well read population . Even on the ground by the 18th
century English merchants, officers, and civil servants, practically all of
them literate and widely read since young children, were finding it quite easy
to conquer and take over the administration in far larger and otherwise highly
advanced civilizations like India.

Soon after the spread of the printing press, the very fundamentals of
organization in Western Europe began to change. In the late Middle Ages
organizations, even royal and papal bureaucracies and banking "super-
companies", rarely engaged more than a few dozen employees. Organizational
size came up against the severe limit of the Dunbar number. By the end ofthe
16th century, the colonial companies and bureaucracies of Spain and Portugal
were vast, highly literate, and well coordinated. Officer corps had often been
raised on military books and thus able to draw lessons from a wide variety of
ancient and recent battles. Even a minor salt extractor in Wear, England, was
employing 300 men by the mid 16th century. (Large organizations in
manufacturing would largely have to wait until the 18th century and the
industrial revolution, however).

Before book consciousness there had been no national languages, but only a
range of often mutually incomprehensible dialects and in Western Europe the
language of the tiny literate elite, Latin. With newly unified national
vernaculars, organizations were able to coordinate and grow in an
unprecedented manner. A much larger group of people, raised on the same
written language, increasingly also came to look and speak similarlyand become
far more mutually trusted. It was the birth of national loyalty and nationwide
webs of trust. The "tribe" to which we are instinctively loyal vastly
increased in size. The pool of already somewhat trusted "same tribe" people
from which a bureacracy could recruit new members vastly increased. National
polities and militaries were able to coordinate political, economic, and
battlefield strategies in an unprecedentedmanner. The 16th century saw the
first major growth of the joint-stock corporation, enabling far more capital
to be invested in the enlarging organizations that engaged in mining and
manufacture as well as government and conquest. This development is probably a
response to the new ability to form larger organizations, since the basic
ideas (corporate law, shares of stock, etc.) had already been in use in Europe
for quite some time. Some of the early English 16th century joint-stock
companies included military expeditions (Drake's privateering voyages and
naval actions were financed through joint stock companies: a different company
for each expedition), trading and slaving companies (the Muscovy and Guniea
companies) and mining and manufacturing companies (the Royal Mining Company
and the Royal Batteries & Mines Company). The most famous became the English
East India Company, but many of the American colonies were also joint-stock
corporations. The first widely traded and initially most successful joint-
stock company was the Dutch East India company,which quickly grew far beyond
the Dunbar number to have thousands of employees.

Book consciousness changed almost every profession. Good books on a trade
could greatly increase the knowledge imparted during apprenticeships, and
indeed eventually led to the end of the apprecenticeship system. Meanwhile,
widely printed books on mathematics and science, such as Euclid's Geometry,
gave knowledge that could be used in a wide variety of occupations, and
training was often restructured to assume and build upon such new general
knowledge. This led to a profound change in labor productivity, moving mankind
away from the Malthusian curve and (along with the expansion of organizational
size beyond the Dunbar limit) eventually to the industrial revolution.

A typical example of the rise of book consciousness was the radical
improvement in how cases were reported in the English legal system by the late
16th century. For the first time, cases and statutes were widely and
accurately cited. This reflected the fact that judges, barristers, attorneys,
and even some of the parties had for the first time printed books of statutes
and cases at their fingertips -- instead of having to find the single copy of
a scroll hidden away in some monk's or bureacrat's library. The first great
English opinion writer, Sir Edward Coke, dates from this period. In turn, the
wide availability of printed statute and case law led to basic changes in the
way we interpret and view the law.

Almost invariably, during the colonial period, when largely illiterate
cultures (i.e. cultures where mostof the second-tier nobility, military
officers, and merchants, and almostall craftsmen and farmers, had not been
raised on books) were encountered by literate Europeans, the latter described
the former with severe ephithats, suchas "savages." This makes our forbears
seem odious to us, who understand that all human races are capable of
literacy, and indeed by now book consciousness has spread to most of the globe
and most of us encounter a widevariety of highly literate people every day.
However, at least in the 16th century for book-raised Western Europeans this
was not so much a racialprejudice as a largely accurate observation. "Savage"
was applied not only to neolithic Africans and Americans, but also to Irish
backlanders and Scottish highlanders. There was a similar Western European
attitude to otherwise very advanced civilizations in India and China. From the
16th century onward, any culture that did not have book consciousness was a
culture of savages.

It's possible that today the availability of thousands of times still more
material to read, readily accessible by search engine, and the expansion of a
small number language groups (but especially English) to a worldwide real-time
network is creating a new "Internet consciousness." People within this network
may soon come to see people outside of it as savages. But that is a topic for
another post.

#### A Roundhead Revolution

Gregory Clark (via Marginal Revolution) has a new and more comprehensive data
set on real wages in England from 1209 to the present. Up to about 1600, it is
consistent with the Malthusian theory that real wages varied inversely with
population. But then from at least 1630, there is a remarkable and
unprecedented departure from the Malthusian curve formed by the ratio of real
wages to population. Real wages rose over 50% from 1630 to 1690 despite rising
population. There is then a stable period from 1730 to 1800 with a new curve
parallel to but offset from the original Malthusian curve, and then a second
startling departure from 1800 to today reflecting the end of this last
Malthusian epoch (ironically just as Malthus was writing).

This data contradicts the idea that nothing remarkable happened to the economy
before the industrial revolution got going in the late 18th century. It also
contradicts the theory that a qualitative shift occurred due the the Glorious
Revolution of 1689 in which Parliament gained more power, some Dutch financial
pratices were introduced, and soon thereafer the Bank of England founded.

Rather, the theory that comes most readily to mind to explain an economic
revolution in 17th century England is the rather un-PC theory of Max Weber.
I'll get back to that, but first Clark debunks the theory of Becker et. al.
regarding family investment. According to this theory, parents choose between
the strategy of having a large number of children and having a small number of
children in whom they invest heavily, teaching them skills. This is basically
the spectrum between "R strategy" and "K strategy" along which all animals
lie, except that with humans there is a strong cultural component in this
choice (or at least Becker et. al. claim or assume that family size has always
been a cultural choice for humans -- see my comments on this below).

According to this family investment theory, until quite recently (perhaps
until the industrial revolution) having more children was the better bet due
to lack of reward for skill, and overall underdevelopment of the economy
limited the reward for skill, so the world was caught in a Malthusian trap of
unskilled labor. However at this recent point in history rewards for skilled
labor went up, making it worthwhile for parents to invest in skills (e.g.
literacy). Clark's data contradicts this theory: his data show that the ratio
of wages for skilled to unskilled laborers did not rise either in the 17th
century revolution or during the industrial revolution, and actually were in
substantial decline by 1900. Indeed, a decline in demand for skilled labor is
what Adam Smith predicted would happen with increasing specialization in
manufacturing. Thus, there was no increase in reward for skill investment
which would have pulled us out of the Malthusian trap. Thus, Clark also
rejects the family investment theory.

I think, however, that part of the family investment theory can be rescued.
Clark's and other data on literacy demonstrate a substantial rise in literacy
just prior to and at the initial stages of the qualitative change in
productivity. Literacy in England doubled between 1580 and 1660. Parents were
in fact making substantial investments in literacy despite an apparent lack of
incentive to do so. Why?

My own theory to explains Clark's data combines Becker, Weber, and the
observations of many scholars about the cultural importance of printing.
Printing was invented in the middle of the 15th century. Books were cheap by
the end of that century. Thereafer they just got cheaper. At first books
printed _en masse_ what scribes had long considered to be the classics.
Eventually, however, books came to contain a wide variety of useful
information important to various trades. For example, legal cases became much
more thoroughly recorded and far more easily accessible, facilitating
development of the common law. Similar revolutions occurred in medicine and a
wide variety of trades, and undoubtedly eventually occurred in the building
trades that were the source of Clark's data.

Printing played a crucial role in the Reformation which saw the schisms from
the Roman Church and the birth in particular of Calvinism. The crucial thing
to observe is that, while per Clark the gains from investment in skills did
not increase relative to unskilled labor, with the availability of cheap books
and with the proper content the costs of investing in the learning did
radically decrease for many skills. Apprenticeships that used to take seven
years could be compressed into a few years reading from books (much cheaper
than bothering the master for those years) combined with a short period
learning on the job. This wouldn't have been a straightforward process as it
required not just cheap books with specialized content about the trades, but
some redesigning of the work itself and up-front investment by parents in
their children's literacy. Thus, it would have required major cultural
changes. That is why, while under my theory cheap books were the catalyst that
drove mankind out of the Malthusian trap, many institutional innovations,
which took over a century to evolve, had to be made to take advantage of those
books to fundamentally change the economy.

Probably the biggest change required is that literacy entails a very large up-
front investment. In the 17th century that investment would have been
undertaken primarily by the family. Such an investment requires delayed
gratification -- the trait Weber considered crucial to the rise of capitalism
and derived from Calvinsim. However, Calvinist delayed gratification under my
revised theory didn't cause capitalism via an increased savings rate, as Weber
et. al. postulated, but rather caused parents to undertake a costly practice
of investing in their children's literacy. Once that investment was made, the
children could take advantage of books to learn skills with unprecedented ease
and to skill levels not previously possible. So the overall investment in
skills did not increase, but instead the focus of that investment shifted from
long apprenticeships of young adults to the literacy of children. At the same
time, the productivity of that investment greatly increased, and the result
was overall higher productivity.

Protestants, and in particular sects like the Quakers derived from Calvinism,
plaid a leading role in the early industrial revolution in England. For
example the Quaker Darby family pioneered iron processign techniques and the
use of iron for railroads and in architecture.

Investment in literacy would have both enabled and been motivated by the
famous Protestant belief that people should read the Bible for themselves
rather than depending on a priest to read it for them. This process would have
started in the late 15th century among an elite of merchants and nobles,
giving rise to the Reformation, but might not have propagated amongst the
tradesmen Clark tracks until the 17th century. It is with the spread of
Huguenot, Puritan, Presbyterian, etc. literacy culture to tradesmen that we
see the 17th century revolution in real wages and the first major move away
from the Malthusian curve.

This theory that the Malthusian trap was evaded by a sharp increase in the
productivity of skill investment explains why population growth did not fall
in the 17th century as Becker et. al. would predict. Cheap books substantially
lowered the cost of skill investment, so the productivity gains could come
without increasing the overall investment in skills and thus without lowering
family size.

The family size/skill investment tradeoff is more likely to explain the second
and sharper departure from Malthusian curve starting around 1800. However
again I think Becker is wrong insofar as this was not due to an increase in
returns on skill (Clark's data debunks this), but due to (1) technology
improving faster than humans can have children, and (2) the rise of birth
control (without which there is little control by choice or culture over
family size -- no cultural family size choice theory really works before the
widespread use of birth control). The catalyst in moving away from the
Malthusian curve was thus not, per Becker et. al., an increase in the returns
on investments in skills, but rather a decrease in the costs of such
investments once cheap books teaching specialized trades were available and
the initial hill of literacy was climbed by Calvinist families. If the
Calvinist literacy-investment theory ("The Roundhead Revolution") is true, we
should see a similar departure from the Malthusian curve at the same time or
perhaps even somewhat earlier in the Netherlands, and also in Scotland, but
probably not in Catholic countries of that period.

(Earlier versions of this article appeared on the authors' blog, Nick Szabo's
Papers and Concise Tutorials

