The proximate reason was religious taboo shared by the traders. The ultimate
reasons (i.e. functional reasons why the institution evolved this way) are a
matter of debate, but I can think of some explanations:  
  
(1) Collectibles often literally circulated in specific cycles that avoid
sinks. This amortized the cost of the collectible across more trades. Why? The
function of collectibles is to lower transaction costs such as non-coincidence
of needs or events. A transaction network uses collectibles more efficiently
if it increases the ratio of velocity to current value. Since velocity was
very low and the value of transactions (trades, marriages, inheritences, etc.)
could be high, this was a big problem in neolithic transaction networks. Some
collectibles had a velocity of once per generation, i.e. they were just family
heirlooms!  
  
The network uses collectibles more efficiently with more members, so we'd
expect the circulation to expand beyond bilateral cycles into cycles around
the entire regular transaction chain. The taboo deters less globally efficient
bilateral cycles from forming.  
  
BTW, the closed-loop transaction cycle is also important to marketing digital
cash or a novel currency that is expensive to redeem (left as an exercise for
the student).  
  
(2) Imagine circular island chain ABCDE, where boats can travel no farther
than their neighbors and C is self-sufficient (or just very small) and doesn't
want to trade goods regularly, but AB, DE, and EA trade regularly. C breaks
the collectible cycle (greatly decreasing the efficiecy of collectibles for
the other islands) unless it acts as a conduit. Simply taking collectibles
from D and shipping them to B (and pocketing some profit of course) to
complete a one-collectible cycle requires acts of faith. With two opposite
circulating collectibles, C simply  
engages in bilateral trades with both B and D to complete both cycles.  
  
(3) the two opposite cycles arguably improved the function of signalling the
liquidity and creditworthiness upstream and downstream in the trading network.
The flow of armshells sent signals about the liquidity of the islands (and
particular trading partners there) one trading step or more revoved in one
direction; the flow of necklaces about liquidity and credit of islands once or
more removed in the other direction.  
The signals are less likely to be confused. (Janet Landa has suggested the
valuables have a credit signalling function).  
  
(4) A variation on (3); the system forces you to trade in the other direction,
and sends signals about your ability to do so. Thus you gain not just direct
information from direct interactions, but also information and commitment
regarding trade in the other direction which cannot be directly observed.

