Leonard, great comments. Tracking the population as something like X*horses +
Y*draft oxen + human population is an interesting idea that crossed my mind.
But what are X and Y? No good reason for them to be 1. Perhaps X could be 2.5,
for a general estimate sometimes given for the value of farm work a horse can
put out versus a human. Except that much of the labor is complementary rather
than substitutable. Or perhaps a ratio of calories consumed, except that
horses eat turnips, hay, and oats which are cheaper per calorie than human
food. And also surprisingly complementary, not just competitive, which is a
fascinating topic I hope to write about further.  
  
Access to colonizable land is indeed important. I've thought of it in three
ways, maybe there are more:  
  
(1) Emigration to colonies (e.g. Americas) driving up labor costs, as you
suggest.  
  
(2) Reclamation of land in Great Britain. (i.e. farming new lands that had
been wild or waste).  
  
(3) Importation of food.  
  
(3) started in Great Britain in the late 1840s but IMHO was not substantial
until about the 1870s. My impression is that the effect of (1) was small and
temporary and largely confined to the late 17th early 18th centuries, but I'd
be happy to be shown wrong. Also it's partly a loss (capital investment in
raising a child lost)as well as a Malthusian gain, so it seems to me difficult
to evaluate the net effect, but I'd welcome ideas of how to do that.  
  
(2) was very important. I will be lumping together with other improvements to
land, since the land had already been nearby since ancient times.  
  
Transportation makes (1) easier but an interesting idea that I think has just
occurred to me is that it may make (2) easier also. Transportation increases
the distance goods can be transported. What I have been thinking about for a
while is that if you can for example now afford horses to transport goods to
markets twice as far away, that makes four times as much farm area available
to grow crops for the market instead of for local subsistence. Now it occurs
to me that some land might be too marginal to farm for subsistence: it's only
economical to farm for sale to a market. So better transportation would lead
to more reclamation, which indeed there was quite a lot of during the 17th and
18th centuries. Reclamation was actually at least as important, and probably
more important, than increasing yield/acre, until the 19th century(both were
happening).  
  
I've been doing extensive research and hope to be posting much more on these
topics, and of course I greatly welcome these kinds of comments on them.  
  
3:46 PM

