Howie, you're ignoring the distinction between lossy and lossless compression.
The "reductions" you describe, for example the simple laws of Brownian motion
and quantum mechanics, abstract away from the vast randomness of these areas.
They don't reduce the randomness, it's just that for certain simple purposes
(but not for many other purposes requiring integration of more varied
phenomena) the vast randomness of nature can be usefully ignored. Thus, for
example, scientists can predict the radioactive decay rate of a large group of
atoms, but not when particular radioactive events will occur. An engineer
would use individual radioactive events where randomness is required (e.g. for
seeding a cryptosystem with random numbers) -- it would be the most absurd
thing to use where regularity or predictability are required.  
  
In many other cases scientists have a tough time predicting the behavior of
aggregates of large amounts of randomness, such as the weather. In the case of
Brownian motion it's only easy to make certain aggregate statements about the
behavior of a volume (usually a simplified volume as in a heat engine), not
about the behavior of particular parts of the volume, especially large volumes
such as the atmosphere.  
  
Even less can the aggregates of strategic and vastly complex or even
purposefully randomizing behaviors of individuals often be lossily yet
usefully reduced using statistics and Newtonian mathematics. Economists can't
generally make predictions about important events in our future as accurate as
those of weather forecasters, much less can other social scientists. Sometimes
observers of the social scene can hit on certain long-term regularities,
analogous to climate forecasting, and there are other and often better ways to
usefully if lossily reduce social complexity (e.g. the arduous legal process
of trial fact-finding, legal ruling based on those facts, and use of precedent
in order to slowly develop a common law).  
  
The vast amounts of specialized knowledge and the ability of people to play
penny-matching games strongly suggest that social science is far less prone to
useful lossy reduction than even weather and climate forecasting. I'm not at
all convinced by your engineering example. The esoteric knowledge of circuit
engineers may well be crucial to understanding to what extent Moore's Law is
going to continue into the future, which in turn is important to predicting
future IT productivity. Indeed, productivity measures and predictions are
notoriously prone to error and bias for ignoring various complex yet important
phenomena.  
  
In your vain search for explanations of the social world that you can
personally understand, you complain about lawyers because in disputes people
grapple with reality at levels of detail that social scientists either ignore
or, if they dive in, get lost in the details and fail to generalize. Newtonian
techniques for predicting simple orbits and the like are grossly inapplicable
for lossily compressing the vast logical depth and randomness of social
reality. One of the best methods we've hit upon over the millenia is the
arduous task of detailed trial fact-finding, followed by legal holdings based
on those facts and the slow development of a large body of legeal precedent --
the common law. Complain about lawyers all you like, but that is how
civilization has usefully progressed, not through the daydreaming of social
"scientists" who want to grossly oversimplify reality in order that they may
enjoy the illusion and delude others with the illusion that they profoundly
understanding the whole.

