Tenius: Tort law -- or more precisely, at least enough tort and property law
to enforce political property rights -- requires a court and enforcement
system that has, at any substantial scale of society, never been and cannot be
generated out of voluntary contracts (which absent an already existing legal
process are unenforceable), but are rather coercively imposed, for example by
war, embargo, or threat of same leading to a treaty, by vote imposed on a
dissenting minority, or by similarly coercive acts. "Social contracts" are the
imaginary _deus ex machina_ , coercive imposition is the historical reality,
and my article listed above "The Coase Theorem is False" explains rigorously
why this has been so. Or you can just read history and reach the same
conclusion -- it shouldn't take long to realize that history is a mind-numbing
repetition, millions of times over, of law being imposed by conquest and other
coercive acts.  
  
This is not to say that the use of choice of law and choice of forum clauses
cannot be greatly increased, especially for relational laws (contract, family,
and the like), increasing _ex ante_ legal competition (the good kind of legal
competition) in these areas to substantial beneficial effect, assuming an
already highly evolved legal system.  
  
I also highly recommend reading real history rather than fiction like
_Robinson Crusoe_ written by people like Daniel Defoe who took for granted the
luxury of a sophisticated tort and property law. For example, read about some
real long-term castaways, like those on Pitcairn Island, where the men
slaughtered each other, apparently fighting over the women, until only two out
of the original fifteen male castaways were left.  
  
nazgulnarsil: Reputational effects in a coercive environment tend to be about
who is the tougher guy, not who is the nicer guy. For reputational effects to
reward primarily good voluntary behavior requires a sophisticated legal system
that punishes coercive behavior, such as the common law and its principle of
non-initiation of force. Absent that, the tough guys -- and being more ready
to initiate force tends to make for a tougher reputation -- are the ones with
the most desirable reputations. Tough generals, tough mafia bosses, tough gang
leaders, depending on the mileau. Far from deterring coercion, absent a good
legal system reputation encourages coercion. Exactly how have reputational
effects detered Somali pirates, for example? To the extent the pirates have a
reputation among their victims for being tough and ruthless, they can demand
higher ransoms. Without well-enforced law against coercion reputation
generally rewards greater coercion.  
  
Much more about the historical reality of how coercion dominates anarchic
environments can be found in my first-listed article above, "Hampton Sides
Sheds Light on Olson and Coase." I also highly recommend Mancur Olson's
account, in his book _Power and Prosperity_ , about anarchy and bandits, and
how stationary bandits are generally much less harmful than roving bandits.
(I'd add that not just "government" generically, but specifically political
property rights and Roman hierarchical government are two of many possible
outcomes of stationary banditry -- but roving bandits can also win or exert a
long-term baleful influence, for example the long-term dominance by mobile
conquerors in the European Dark Ages).

