There is a sense in which gene expression can be hierarchical: some genes are
"master genes" that control the expression of many other genes. In other
words, they select which genes to express when. It is thus entirely possible,
and indeed in advanced organisms common, for a genome to encode a wide variety
of phenotypes, only some of which get expressed, depending on the alleles of
the master gene(s), on environmental cues, or both. Master genes can control
gender, sexual orientation, and a wide variety of other complex structures and
behavioral tendencies encoded for by complex assemblies of genes.  
  
The green beard effect occurs when linked genes produce all three of the
following: (1) a signal, (2) recognition of that signal in others, and (3)
different behaviors (e.g. altruism) towards those exhibiting that signal. If
the genes can remain linked, organisms expressing the green beard allele can
cooperate with each other and spread in the population. Most evolutionary
biologists, studying the genetic evolution of behaviors in animals, have
tended to dismiss green beard effects as rare, because they have only rarely
been unambiguously observed in the field, and because it's highly unlikely
that genes can remain linked in this manner during sexual recombination.  
  
I strongly suspect that this view is mistaken. It's hard to distinguish green
beard from normal ("blue beard") signalling and recognition systems (such as
those involved in kin altruism, mother/fetus interfaces, sexual selection,
gender recognition, etc.) Green beard effects usually evolve "parasitically"
on already existing "blue beard" signalling systems. Both of these make it
difficult to recognize green beard effects, because they are usually strongly
associated with existing "blue beard" signalling systems. Furthermore, strong
linkages are not nearly as rare as has been assumed, because of the existence
of master genes that control the expression of many other genes. Alternative
alleles of a master gene could, for example, code for the selective expression
of alternative strategies encoded in many other genes. In other words, a wide
variety of genes, each existing in all members of a species, could code for
two or more complex strategies, with a master gene coding for _which_ of the
strategies actually gets expressed.  
  
Nature provides a great example where I believe a master green beard gene is
at work: the side-blotched lizard. The male lizards have three different
strategies for defending mates: dominance, sneakiness, and cooperative mate
guarding. Violating standard theory, these sexual strategies correspond to
very distinct throat color patterns: orange, yellow, and blue. Orange-throated
lizards dominate a mate and territory and don't cooperate with other males in
this task. Yellow-throated lizards look and act like females, and sneak around
cuckolding orange-throated lizards. Blue-throated lizards cooperate to detect
and fend off yellow lizards, but are weaker and can be defeated by yellow-
throated lizards. The result is  

> a kind of "rock-paper-scissors" game, where orange defeats blue, blue
defeats yellow, and yellow defeats orange. The result is an evolutionarily
stable situation in which no single color morph can dominate the population...  
>  
> The remarkable thing about the color morphs of side-blotched lizards is that
an enormous range of behavioral, physiological, and life-history traits are
correlated with throat color. Genes for different traits can be linked
physically if they occur close together on a chromosome, but according to
[evolutionary biologist Barry] Sinervo, throat color is linked to far more
traits than could possibly be physically linked on the same chromosome.  
>  
> It's almost as if the whole genome is tightly tethered to this one master
locus," he said. "In order to be a really 'good' blue, you have to have all
these other alleles [of different genes] lined up in the right combination,
and the same is true for orange and yellow color morphs. So there is strong
selection for these different fitness combinations.  
>  
> "The whole genome crystallizes into three types," Sinervo said. "The alleles
for all these different traits should be independent and separated on the
chromosomes, yet the genes are interacting through this one locus."

The lizards, the throat color gene determining orange, yellow, or blue throat
splotches seems to be tightly correlated to the rest of a distinct complex
strategem. This is inexplicable by traditional arguments against the green
beard, which assume that the alternative strategies are coded in three
separate sets of alternative alleles, all of which must be expressed to work.
Being broken up and recombined every generation, they cannot stably evolve as
distinct and competing sets of genes. But the cooperation of the blue-throated
lizards qualifies as a green beard effect, bringing this assumption into
question. The linkage of throat colors with complex behavioral strategies can
be readily explained if _all three_ strategies are encoded in _all_ male side-
blotched lizard genomes, and there is only one strong linkage, that is between
the throat color gene and a gene that controls the expression of many other
genes. Indeed, I wouldn't be surprised if the throat color gene and the master
gene were the same gene.  
  
There are strong adaptive reasons for master genes to control complex
assemblages in this way. Behavioral strategies, and indeed structures and
metabolic pathways, that are too complicated but not ubiquitous in a breeding
population are encoded across too many unlinked genes. As a result they cannot
survive sexual recombination. All advanced multi-cellular organisms thus have
master genes or distinct chromosomes that control the expression of many other
genes. In the case of gender, distinct chromosomes are usually involved, but
master genes can behave similarly, producing small sets of complicated
strategies, each strategy very distinct from each other and each a distinct
alternative to the other. In information theory terms, there is a large
information distance between each of the alternative strategies, just as there
are many differences between the genes expressed in the development of a
female versus those expressed in a male. A wide variety of distinct
morphological and behavioral traits are bundled into a small number (in the
case of genders, typically two) of alternatives. A wide variety of other genes
encode the distinct complex structures or strategies, to be invoked by master
genes, developmental stages, and environmental cues. Since the complicated
parts of each strategy are encoded in _every_ member of the breeding
population, there is no problem with sexual recombination breaking linkages
between many genes encoding each strategy: each gene of each strategy is still
there waiting, in the next generation, to be invoked by the master gene.  
  
I strongly suspect that master genes and green beard effects analyzed in this
manner will shed light on a wide variety of puzzles in evolutionary biology,
including sexual selection, sexual orientation, and racial and ethnic
preferences that, under the assumption that green beard effects are not
important, have long defied analysis or been assumed to be purely
environmental.

