Daniel, thanks again for some very cogent comments. I should have said _often_
indistinguishable -- thanks for the correction.  
  
As for fatawa: how "the community" responds to such scholarly opinions varies,
but it is has certainly been known to include force, up to an including death,
after which reputation doesn't much matter. Private law, like self-defense,
citizen's arrest, the liberty of house, and so on, usually does not imply the
lack of force. That it often seems to in some modern countries is an artifact
of the artificial Romanist idea that "the government" has a "monopoly of
force" -- but as we see with the shopkeeper's privilege of arrest, the right
of self-defense, federalism, and so on, this isn't really true even in the
most Romanist of polities. As for reputation-based commercial law, like the
ICC and the credit-card chargeback system, this works only to a limited
degree, is special to certain arenas, and operates on a background of
contract, property, and other commercial law based on forceful remedies. It is
wonderful when this can be done but the scope is quited limited.  
  
As my movie example highlights, a photo or film clip taken out of context can
be highly misleading. It can condemn the responder to force and thereby reward
the initiator of force. The Internet, where most people usually get bored
after about a page of text,is like the mass media a truly awful substitute for
a jury trial where 12 people must sit down for a very long time and become
very aquainted with compelled evidence presented by all parties with
substantial interests in the dispute.  
  
I am certainly quite in favor of nonviolent enforcement where it is possible
-- that's the prime reason I think up and discuss smart contracts and related
technologies -- but even this kind of advance is hardly a universal substitute
for the background threat of force in legal procedure, and in politics
generally. It is certainly an extreme form of blindness to believe, as many
political debates suggest many people believe, that our historical and
currently dominant political and legal systems are not based on the threat of
force. This also applies to proposed future systems -- whether these involve
expanding government scope by nationalization, or shrinking it by
privatization, or merely IPOing the government and paying dividends, or
monarchy, or even my own nonterritorially decentralized jurisdiction proposal.
They all are based on the threat of force, which will, if the political idea
is good, hopefully involve far more valuable responses to force than it does
initiation of force.

