greg: "Peak oil states that any given oil field will eventually peak out and
decline in production."  
  
But this trivial truth is not, of course, what most people mean by "peak oil".
For most people, "peak oil" is a supposed imminent crisis in which we run out
of liquid hydrocarbons as an economical source of energy.  
  
anonymous thoroughly confuses price with EROI. They often don't have much to
do with each other. Price is primarily driven by the general commodity
inflation, which in turn is primarily driven by central bank policy. The
gold/oil price ratio is still near 10:1 (gold per troy ounce over oil per
barrel). That ratio is still well within the range that it has been for most
of the last century. Oil could be $100 per barrel or $1,000 per barrel and
still say nothing about EROI.  
  
Alas, inflation first shows up in commodities (as the most easily traded
inflation-proof asset) and gives the false signal to all the "peak oil"
fanatics that we are "running out of oil." The same thing happened in the
1970s, when there was no more or less "oil shortage" than there was in 1991 or
now.  
  
As for EROI, all the major EROI barriers are amenable to technological
improvements. Only a modicum of mechanical literacy, for example, is needed to
see that what anonymous suggests is a supposedly hard physics barrier of
gravity is no such thing. Look at how an elevator works -- counterweights.
Elevator engineers have long ago overcome anonymous' fear and do not need to
expend in the net as much energy as would be required to lift all the people
they lift, because they can take people and things down too. Similarly, water
or sludge could be dropped to replace oil if the gravity barrier ever actually
became an EROI barrier to oil extraction.  
  
Innovations have substantially reduced the EROI of tar sand extraction over
just the last two decades, putting the vast supplies of tar sands (which
probably far exceed Middle Eastern supplies of oil) at our disposal. And we
long ago learned how to gasify coal with a good EROI. Despite several hundred
years of intensive coal use we are nowhere near "peak coal."  
  
The "peak oil" movement is full of people obsessing over a handful of simple
variables, thinking that by themselves these variables reflect the full
reality, and incapable of looking at the broader picture so that they can
interpret those variables in context. It's also full of people who can't seem
to find any meaning unlife unless they can get all jacked up about some
looming disaster.

