What are the top three amendments you would like to see to the United States
Constitution? James Buchanan proposes three. I think something quite like the
latter two are already implied by broad clauses in our Constitution, but in
the coming era of "conservative" Footnote Four justices, it would be good to
reify them as specific textual amendments. Here's my take on Buchanan's three
proposed amendments:  
  
1\. Fiscal responsibility -- requires a super-majority vote by the Congress to
run a federal budget deficit. This is a good idea, but since it would provide
political cover for Congress to raise taxes, I'd add a requirement of a super-
majority to raise taxes, which can be found in some state constitutions.  
  
2\. Non-discriminatory politics -- Based on Hayek's proposed amendment --
“Congress shall make no law authorizing government to take any discriminatory
measures of coercion.” Actually, this is the original meaning of both the
General Welfare and Equal Protection Clauses, but it would be nice to add more
specificity so that our courts would actually enforce them. I think the
biggest issue here is that the Equal Protection Clause is currently treated as
applying various levels of scrutiny to a handful of "suspect" (race)
"intermediate" (gender), and "rationality with teeth" (age, sexual
orientation, etc.) classifications. What should happen is that _any_
classification made in any law, from "violent felons" to "infants", whether it
be "employees" or "employers", ought to be examined under at least the
_Lawrence_ "rationality with teeth" standard. In other words, every law ought
to be independently reviewable by the courts with respect to any of the
distinctions it makes between different types of people, as to whether those
distinctions are rationally related to a legitimate government purpose.  
  
3\. I'm not clear on what Buchanan's third proposal is, but I'm guessing it's
encapsulated by "the natural liberty to enter into and exit from agreements."
During the era between the _Allgeyer_ and _Nebbia_ cases (1897-1934) the
United States Supreme Court recognized a right along these lines, sometimes
called "freedom of contract." Modern cases from _Griswold_ to _Lawrence_ have
established rights in more intimate relationships. As I suggested in my
previous post, I'm greatly in favor of freedomm of contract in principle, but
it's difficult to specify what it would involve in practice. There are
detailed common law precedents and statutes (the Uniform Commercical Code as
enacted in the states) governing contract law. Under these precedents and
statutes contracts are often found to be unenforceable, as has always been the
case at common law. I propose instead the following amendment: "No right of
contract or property shall be infringed with the purpose or effect of unduly
burdening choice in intimate relationships or medical services, or the control
of parent over child." It still needs work, and we might like to add to or
subtract from the list of protected categories, but I think it's a big
improvement over the vague "freedom of contract." This kind of protection is
already implied (IMHO) by substantive due process cases from _Allgeyer_ and
_Pierce v. Society of Sisters_ to _Griswold_ and _Casey_. However, with
justices hostile to this libertarian tradition, we may soon have an urgent
need to reify these rights in the form of specific constitutional amendments.

