Daniel, an anthill or almost any other designed or evolved thing is very easy
to distinguish from geological formation, unless it was specifically designed
or evolved to hide. An anthill for example has an eerie uniformity of grain
sizes, is oddly smooth compared to normal eroded dirt, has holes, and has ants
crawling over it. (That's just recalling my memory of playing with anthills as
a kid -- I suspect there are probably also rare molecules in those grains that
one could see in spectral lines).  
  
Before worrying about distinguishing evolved from designed, first we need to
discover something that might be evolved _or_ designed. But no astronomical
phenomenon shows any signs of adaptation, whether evolved or designed.  
  
For example, we'd expect merely "geological" (unadapted) star systems in a
region to be as they in fact appear: white hot stars wasting all their energy,
planets wasting most of their mass far from the surface, and so on. But we'd
expect adapted star systems to glow in the infrared, acting like radiators for
heat engines as the observe side efficiently harnesses the light of its star.
Dyson shells would cover the galaxy's stars like plants cover the lands of our
planet. Dyson shell forests would obscure our view of stars like leaves shade
a hiker in a forest.  
  
An adapted galaxy would look radically different from the galaxies we observe:
it would primarily radiate in and below the infrared, due to adapted surfaces
rather than dust clouds. The Adapted surfaces that would dominate our view of
these galaxies would have very unique optical spectra (which astronomers can
measure) reflecting molecular structures that are very rare outside adapted
entities like leaves (e.g. chlorphyll) or solar panels (e.g. crystalline
silicon). Chlorophyll and crystalline silicon in significant quantities don't
exist outside adapted structures. The same goes for the surfaces (or more
precisely visible portions) of other adapted structures -- they typically
contain molecular structures highly adapted to surface use (most often for
their optical properties) that are very rare to nonexistant in unadapted
nature. The more advanced or well-adapted the surface, the more likely this is
to be true. Adaptation whether evolved or designed sticks out like a sore
thumb against the merely "geological" unadapted nature, but the cosmos we
observe (astronomers can see hundreds of billions of galaxies) looks quite
"geological" \-- in all the vast computer disks worth of astronomical data
nothing adapted has ever been recognized.

