Craig: Back in the 1970s and 80s many scientists thought a bigger threat was
the possibility of entering a new ice age. It's certainly a good thing we
didn't heed _those_ warnings. Warnings should not be heeded unless the are
probable with high expected damage, or the cost of heeding them is low, or
both. The cost of heeding global warmining warnings, especially the more
extreme and improbable versions, is very high and potentially catastrphic.
More catastrophic than the worst case global warming scenario of significant
probablity. If we've learned anything from history, especially of the last
century, we should have learned that politicals, especially large-scale
political experiments, can be vastly more destructive than nature.  
  
It costs nothing to sound plausibly hysterical, and there are thousands of
plausible apocalyptic warnings that turn out dead wrong for every one that has
more than a grain of truth to it. Currently there is a great fad for such
warnings surrounding global warming, which in and of itself has far more than
a grain of truth to it, the authority of which is taken advantage of by vast
numbers of horrid sounding scenarios of very high actual unlikelihood.  
  
For this and other reasons, it's a very bad idea to overreact to errors in one
direction by being biased in the other direction. That's part of Tabarrok's
wisdom -- the way to resolve error is to patiently experiment and observe and
learn, rather than to compensate with errors in the other direction and then
think one has reduced uncertainty enough to properly act.  
  
You link to a good article on biofuels and to what extent they are really a
solution to global warming. Biofuels raise the very important issue of what
counts as "carbon" for tax or tradeable rights purposes. This is one of the
great uncertainties we need to resolve before committing large chunks of our
economy to a particular, possibly quite flawed carbon accounting scheme.  
  
Brian: I feel your pain. I consider space fandom to be a wonerful kind of
entertainment, a more realistic and satisfying version of watching _Star
Wars_, albeit not necessarily any more practical.  
  
However the realism means that this fun can be put to practical use as long as
one is not too overly religious about the specifics. (An example of irrational
and costly beliefs are those who still insist on the ancient von Braun
sacraments of space station, then moon base, then Mars base, etc. series of
"next logical steps" that all of us are suppose to agree on and fund).  
  
In your case, I suspect there are a variety of near-future applications of
carbon nanotubes, but the largest-scale of them are unlikely to be among the
more imminent ones. Of course you know more about carbon nanotubes and space
elevator engineering and economics than I do; I'm just applying
generalizations I've learned in other areas. But my guess is that those near-
term dirtside applications will, along with practical automation research and
other commercial areas, probably do far more to advance future space
development than anything NASA is now doing, or even that an immediate direct
stab at the ambitious end goal by anybody else will do. Reverse spinoffs, in
other words, are where the real action is.

