(This is an edited version of comments I made on Catallarchy, posted here for
my readers)  
  
The Takings Clause reads, "…nor shall private property be taken for public
use, without just compensation." This has always been interpreted by courts to
forbid taking for anything other than a "public use," compensated or
otherwise. One can summarize the reasons for this interpretation as follows:  
  
(1) It’s the common-sense way to interpret the clause in light of the rest of
the Constitution (e.g. in light of the rest of the 5th Amendment, by the
doctrine of enumerated powers, by the 9th and 10th Amendments, by the
interpretation rule of smaller to greater, etc.)  
  
(2) Precedent: the Supreme Court has always interpreted it that way. The big
dispute is not over this, but over what "public use" means. Alas, the
preposterously broad _Kelo_ definition of "public use" makes the complement
category "private use" almost a nullity.  
  
I’d add that forbidding of takings for private use reflects what English
common law and state practice (interpreting similar provisions in state
constitutions) was at the time of ratification. The framers simply took it for
granted, thus the poor wording.  
  
(The framers realized such dangers of misinterpretation generally, however,
which is why we have the 9th and 10th Amendments: to prevent construing of
poorly worded clauses against individual rights).  
  
There are also good policy reasons to forbid takings for private use, such as
the public choice waste that arises when B lobbies officials to take A’s land
for B’s use.  
  
Which brings us to why _Kelo_ wasn't even close to an accurate opinion about
the law. The "public use" in the 5th Amendment probably referred to Hale’s
"public interest" doctrine, which when the 5th Amendment was ratified meant
only functions involving either coercion or monopoly – for example a police
station or courthouse, or the equivalent of taking a toll on the only bridge
across a river. A franchise was, to quote a modern movie, a business that
could legally make "an offer you can't refuse." It was as a result closely
regulated under common law. The most common requirements were that it had to
be open to the general public, that the service be well maintained, and that
it was restricted to charging only "reasonable" tolls.  
  
It is thus unconstitutional to take private property for the use of any
competitive enterprise (even if it’s run by government). There are almost
surely also Due Process Clause restrictions to taking property, even for a
coercive function or a monopoly, when that involves "taking from A to give to
B" (to paraphrase Sir Edward Coke in the 17th century and Justice Samuel Chase
in _Calder v. Bull_ ), and to take property such as a house or communications
device used to exercise a fundamental right, as I describe here. But U.S.
courts don’t recognize those rights either.  
  
Around the time of the ratification of the U.S constitution, state
constitutions that specified language like the U.S. constitution, and
generally under common law, forbad takings (compensated or not) for
non-"public use." There are two somewhat different issues here, since there
were two different interpretations of what was forbidden as not "public use."
The first forbad a taking from A to give to B rather than to a government. The
second (and I believe correct) approach forbad taking for the use of a
competitive enterprise, i.e. an enterprise that did not under the old common
law require a special patent-like property right called a "franchise." A
franchise was required, per Hale, for a natural monopoly which charged a
"toll." A franchise could also be a privately owned court or police force
(these were common in England, and there were some private courts in some U.S.
colonies, but these had largely disappeared in the U.S. by the time of the
ratification). A franchise was required by common law to be open to the public
and charge a "reasonable" toll, unlike a competitive enterprise which could
charge the market rate.  
  
On the first interpretation(whether private property could be taken from A and
given to B), the following claims in early Supreme Court majority opinions are
a bit exagerated, but generally correct:

> "...a law that takes property from A. and gives it to B: It is against call
reason and justice, for a people to entrust a Legislature with SUCH powers;
and, therefore, it cannot be presumed that they have done it. The genius, the
nature, and the spirit, of our State Governments, amount to a prohibition of
such acts of legislation." Calder v. Bull, 3 U.S. 386, 388 (1798)

> "We know of no case, in which a legislative act to transfer the property of
A. to B. without his consent, has ever been held a constitutional exercise of
legislative power in any state in the union. On the contrary, it has been
constantly resisted as inconsistent with just principles, by every judicial
tribunal in which it has been attempted to be enforced.... The counsel for the
plaintiffs have themselves admitted that they cannot contend for any such
doctrine." Wilkinson v. Leland, 27 U.S. 627, 658 (1829)

On the second interpretation(whether private property could be taken for a
competitive enterprise instead of a franchise) the evidence is more concrete,
but misunderstood, since hardly anybody understands franchise law these days.
Justice Thomas' dissent in _Kelo_ [with my comments in brackets] gives a good
overview of the case law at the time:

> States employed the eminent domain power to provide quintessentially public
goods, such as public roads, toll roads, ferries, canals, railroads, and
public parks [all of these were, if privately held, franchises under common
law -- NS]. Though use of the eminent domain power was sparse at the time of
the founding, many States did have so-called Mill Acts, which authorized the
owners of grist mills operated by water power to flood upstream lands with the
payment of compensation to the upstream landowner. Those early grist mills
“were regu­lated by law and compelled to serve the public for a stipu­lated
toll and in regular order,” and therefore were actu­ally used by the
public.They were common carriers— quasi-public entities. [These were toll-
taking franchises -- NS] These were “public uses” in the fullest sense of the
word, because the public could legally use and benefit from them equally. See
Public Use Limi­tations 903 (common-carrier status traditionally afforded to
“private beneficiaries of a state franchise or another form of state monopoly,
or to companies that operated inconditions of natural monopoly”).

Thomas cites many state cases where full public access was required, or else
the taking prohibited. This however is an incomplete distinction: public
access was merely required of a franchise by the common law, but there were
other common requirements, such as the "reasonable toll" requirement, and
these requirements didn't define a franchise. A franchise was defined per Hale
as a business that its "customers" could not avoid using: either a coercive
process, as tax farming or operating a private court, or a natural monopoly,
i.e. an unavoidable service that charged a toll.

> To be sure, some early state legislatures tested the limits of their state-
law eminent domain power. Some States enacted statutes allowing the taking of
property for the purpose of building private roads [franchises were privately
owned, so this is no exception to the rule -- NS]. These statutes were mixed;
some required the pri­vate landowner to keep the road open to the public, and
others did not. Later in the 19th century, moreover, the Mill Acts were
employed to grant rights to private manufacturing plants, in additionto grist
mills that had common-carrier duties. [citations omitted]

