Climate-based explanations for the birth of agriculture are nonsense (like
this one, via Marginal Revolution, which adds further nonsense about
agriculture having originated around rivers). Their popularity stems from
little more than the climate being an easily measured variable. There was
plenty of good land quite suitable for agriculture in temperate climates (and,
more importantly, in thousands of temperate microclimates) during the last Ice
Age. There were many areas even during the coldest part of the Ice Age that
satisfied the climate, soil, ecology, and other environmental requirements of
early agriculture. They were just closer to the equator.  
  
More likely explanations for the agricultural revolution are probably far less
observable:  
  

> The crucial role of security for the history of farming may also shed light
on the birth of agricultural in the first place. Hunter-gatherers were very
knowledgeable about plants and animals, far more than the typical modern. It
would not have taken a genius -- and there were many, as their brains were as
large as ours -- to figure out that you can plant a seed into the ground and
it will grow. There must have been, rather, some severe institutional
constraints that prevented agriculture from arising in the first place. The
basic problem is that somebody has to protect that seedling for several months
from enemies, and then has to harvest it before the enemy (or simply a envious
neighbor) does. Security and allocation of property rights between providers
of security and providers of farm labor were the intractable problems that
took vast amounts of trial and error as well as genius to solve in order for
agriculture to take root.

  

This would also explain how agriculture could spread from a single innovation
yet look like independent inventions in the archaeological record. There were
at least eight centers of secondary innovations (e.g. crop and livestock
domestications and agricultural tools) that look independent: the Middle East,
China, India, sub-Saharan Africa, Peru, central America, eastern North
America, and New Guinea. But they all occured within a few thousand years of
each other, after at least 100,000 years of anatomically modern humans. During
these millenia humans were without agriculture despite large numbers of
microclimates and microecologies suitable for agriculture during that entire
period.

This indicates the slow spread (with many failed attempts and, quite likely,
many reversals) of a primary innovation necessary for the use of these
secondary innovations. The primary innovation had to be primarily cultural
rather than genetic because it came long after the out-migration from Africa
c. 80K-40K BP and was taken up by many of the genetically diverse results of
that out-migration. Given what we know about the importance of cooperation,
institutions, and security to the productivity of human economies, that
innovation which slowly spread and made agriculture possible was almost surely
an innovation in the culture of cooperation. Alas, the spread of such an
innovation in oral culture can be observed at best indirectly in the
archaeological record.  
  
This would put the origins of agricultural into the more general large
patterns of history, the most important of which are based on the interaction
between security and wealth.

