Daniel, your points about the security may be valid, (I haven't audited the
code, and it could certainly use such an audit). And on top of this I'd add
the copious legal risks. But I'm afraid the economic points are another
matter.  
  
As for the long transaction delay and poor scalability, I long considered bit
gold as a design for "high-powered money" that like gold could be used as an
investment vehicle, a medium for large transactions, and a reserve currency
against which digital notes could be issued. It would be however be far more
securely auditable than remote gold vaults. If you're right on this critique
Bitcoin may be destined to become a high-powered money rather than a day-to-
day payment system for the masses.  
  
The computational cost issue is as I've shown in my above-linked account of
the origins of money a red herring. As with gold, the mining cost gets
amortized by the function of bit gold in lowering transaction costs, both as a
store of value and a medium of exchange. If somebody figures out how eliminate
creation costs of a digital currency without reintroducing an incentive to
inflate I wish all power to them, but I'm not holding my breath.  
  
And what's up with the term "cryptocurrency"? What is it supposed to mean?
Cryptography is used to protect payments systems as radically different as
credit cards, Chaumian digital cash, and Bitcoin. The term encourages the
popular but profoundly naive view of Bitcoin as merely another form of digital
cash.  
  
As for whether it's a bubble, any collectible market can turn into a bubble.
It's the nature of the beast. But at the current prices and supply, the amount
of Bitcoin (last I heard about $40 million in USD terms) was still very small
compared to many other collectible markets, much less the amount of currency
in circulation from the central banks of even tiny governments. Bitcoin
certainly has major downside risks but it also has far more upside potential
than other collectibles. So obviously it's an extremely risky investment at
this point in time. Nobody should be doing anything remotely close to what I
read this morning from some twitterer (presumably it was just prevaricating
puffery) and putting "all [his] money" into it. It's a curiosity collectible,
an alternative to a small fraction of one's gold holdings as a hedge for fiat-
denominated debt, and a medium of exchange for at least certain niche
transactions. And potentially much more.

