In the Rothbardian ideology of anarcho-capitalism, all law can supposedly be
derived from contract, the entry into which is supposed to be voluntary.
"Social contract" theories of government also tend, by this euphemism, to
suggest that the formation of governments was somehow voluntary, an idiotic
idea that anarchists such as the legal scholar Lysander Spooner have easily
debunked.  
  
David Friedman justifies his neoclassical version of anarcho-capitalism by the
Coase Theorem, which translated into legal terms is usually understood as the
following: in the absence of transaction costs, and regardless of the prior
allocation of legal rights, any tort ("externality" in economic terms) can be
resolved by voluntary bargaining to form a contract, resulting in an
economically efficient outcome.  
  
Here are some places where Friedman relies on the Coase Theorem:  

> Consider two [legal protection] firms with somewhat different customer
bases, bargaining over what court's legal system to agree on. Firm A prefers
one legal system, say one that permits capital punishment for murder. Firm B
prefers a different system, one that does not permit it.  
>  
> Each firm estimates the value to its customers, and from that the increase
it can expect in its revenues, if it can provide them with its preferred legal
system. We expect, along conventional Coaseian lines, that they will agree on
the system that maximizes their combined benefit. [Source].  
>  
> A still more attractive and more likely solution [to avoid war] is advance
contracting between the agencies. Under this scenario, any two agencies that
faced a significant probability of such clashes would agree on an arbitration
agency to settle them-a private court. Implicit or explicit in their agreement
would be the legal rules under which such disputes were to be settled. Under
these circumstances, both law enforcement and law are private goods produced
on a private market...  
>  
> Readers familiar with the economic literature on efficiency may notice that
my argument owes more to Coase than to Marshall. I have relied on the idea
that parties will negotiate towards efficient contracts, rather than on the
conventional analysis of a competitive industry....[Source]  
>

  
The proof that the Coase Theorem is false is actually quite simple: the
assumptions of the Theorem contradict each other. The assumption that
transactions are voluntary contradicts the assumption that _any_ prior
allocation of rights is possible, including rights that allow one party to
coerce another. In fact, for the Theorem to at all make sense, a very large
and crucial set of prior rights allocations must be excluded -- namely any
that allow any party to coerce another.  
  
But we can't generally solve externalities problems by bargaining under this
revised assumption. Externalities cannot be neatly distinguished from coercive
acts, as extending one of Coase's own examples illustrates. In this example we
have a railroad with a train that, passing by a farmer's wheat field, gives
off sparks, which may start a fire in the field. In Coase's account, the prior
allocation of rights might give the railroad the right to give off sparks, in
which case the farmer must either plant his wheat far enough away from the
railroad (wasting land) or buy the right to be free from sparks from the
railroad. The prior allocation might instead already give the farmer the right
to be completely free from sparks, in which case the railroad can either buy
the right to emit sparks from the farmer or install spark-suppressors. If
these are the two possible prior allocations of rights, Coase concluded that
the railroad and the farmer will in the absence of transaction costs bargain
to the most economically efficient outcome: if it costs less for the railroad
to reduce the sparks than for the farmer to keep an unplanted firebreak,
bargaining will achieve this outcome, and if the reverse, bargaining will
achieve the reverse outcome, regardless of whether the farmer initially had
the right to be free from sparks. So far, so good -- it seems, on the surface,
that if bargaining is costless an efficient outcome will be achieved.  
  
The problem is that these are not the only prior allocations possible. The
Coase Theorem is supposed to work under _any_ other allocation of prior
rights. But it doesn't. It fails for a large and crucially important class of
prior allocations: namely any that allow one party to coerce another. Here's
an allocation that may or may not allow coercion, depending on your definition
of coercion: a prior allocation that gives the railroad the right to emit as
many sparks as it wants. In particular it includes the right of the railroad
to emit sparks even if it could costlessly avoid emitting them. Here's one
that is fairly clearly coercive: the right to emit sparks even if emitting
them costs the railroad something extra (i.e. giving the railroad the right to
purposefully emit sparks to start fires even at some extra cost to the
railroad). Here's another farther down the coercive spectrum: a prior
allocation that gives the railroad the right to torch the farmer's entire
field with a flamethrower.  
  
It is usually the case with coercion, as here, that it is far cheaper for the
coercer to cause harm than for the victim to prevent it. To increase the
threatened harm to the farmer, and thus the revenue it can obtain from
extortive bargaining with the farmer, the railroad can spend extra to
purposefully threaten the farmer. Here, it is likely far cheaper for the
railroad to install a super spark emitter, or a flamethrower, than for the
farmer to defend his fields from these sources. Indeed, since any prior
allocation is possible, why stop with the farmer's fields? Another possible
allocation would give the railroad a right to torch the farmer's barns, and
his house, to kidnap his children -- any prior ( _ex ante_ ) set of rules is
supposed to be possible. In turn, if the _ex ante_ rules allow, the farmer
could threaten to tear up the railroad tracks or sabotage them to derail the
trains. Under all these prior allocations of rights that allow coercion, the
railroad need not just bargain to avoid the costs of supressing its
externality (whether sparks or flamethrowers), nor need the farmer bargain
just within this artificially voluntary spectrum of possibilities that Coase
and his followers assume. Instead, if the _ex ante_ rules so allow the
railroad and farmer will bargain to avoid a negative-sum outcome: harm to the
farmer with no direct benefit to the railroad, or vice versa. Since there are
substantial _ex post_ benefits to one party from extorting payments from the
other, the party that can threaten the most harm at the least cost to itself
has, if the _ex ante_ rules allow, a strong economic incentive to engage in
such coercion. These negative-sum games of coercion and extortion lead to
highly inefficient outcomes, and they can only be avoided by carefully
crafting the _ex ante_ rules to avoid such coercion and extortion. These
coercive threats that make negative-sum games possible, and that decrease the
payoffs of positive-sum games, cannot be neatly distinguished in practice from
innocent externalities: any act or omission of one party that harms another,
i.e. any externality, doubles as a threat, whether a tiny threat or a large
threat, from which an extortion premium, its size depending on the size of the
threat, can be extracted.  
  
In order to try to distinguish coercion, and the extortion it gives rise to,
from an "innocent" externality that can be cured by efficient bargaining,
there are ways to exclude some of these extreme possibilities from the prior
allocation of rights. And indeed criminal and tort law do this: they
distinguish purposeful behavior from negligent, and negligent from the mere
unfortunate accident. But any such _ex ante_ distiction contradicts the claim
that the Coase Theorem applies to _any_ prior allocation of rights. Voluntary
bargaining cannnot give rise to tort and criminal law. Quite the opposite is
true: at least a basic tort law is necessary to make voluntary bargaining
possible. Tort law (and the associated property law which defines boundaries
for the tort of trespass) is logically prior to contract law: good contracts
depend on good tort and property law. Without a good tort law already in
place, nobody, including the "protection firms" posited by anarcho-capitalism,
can engage in the voluntary bargains that are necessary for efficient
outcomes.  
  
This is not to claim that the polar opposite of anarcho-capitalism must be
true, i.e. that "the government" along the lines we are familiar with is
necessary. Instead, a system of political property rights that is unbundled
and decentralized is possible, and may give rise to many of the benefits (e.g.
peaceful competition between jurisdictions) promised by anarcho-capitalism.
But political property rights are not based on a Rothbardian assumption of
voluntary agreement -- instead, in these systems the procedural law of
political property rights, as well as much of substantive property rights and
tort law, is prior to contract law, and their origin necessarily involves some
degree of coercion. Political and legal systems have not, do not, and cannot
originate solely from voluntary contract. Both traditional "social contract"
justifications of the state and the Rothbardian idea that contracts can
substitute for the state are false: in all cases coercion is involved, both at
the origin and in the ongoing practice of legal procedure. In both cases the
term "contract" is used, implying voluntary agreement, when the term "treaty",
a kind of agreement often forced by coercion, would far more accurately
describe the reality. The real task for libertarians and other defenders of
sound economics and law is not to try to devise law from purely voluntary
origins, an impossible task, but to make sure the _ex ante_ laws make
voluntary bargaining possible and discourage coercion and extortion (by any
party, including political property rights holders or governments) as much as
possible.

