Here's a follow-on comment I made at Marginal Revolution (slightly revised and
extended here), in response to the following quote by one "M1EK" to try to
explain why oil prices were low in the 1980s and 1990s: "in the 1980s the
Saudis had capacity they could bring online at any moment (and eventually did,
of course)."  
  
To this I respond:  
  
The same was true in the 1970s and is true today, and people in the oil
business are well aware of this and it is properly reflected in the current
price. Nothing has magically changed about the geology of oil in the ten years
since oil was $20 a barrel. And not only Saudis, but Russia, Iraq, Venezuala,
and Mexico are all pumping well below their potential (mostly for monetary
reasons which I explain below), and will still have plenty of oil around
decades into the future. And in that time most of the following -- Canadian
tar sands, U.S. shale oil, deep sea oil, coal gasification, biofuels, nuclear,
wind, solar, and conservation -- will make a big dent in the consumption
demand for oil. As purely economics 101 matter of supply and demand for
consumption, the value of oil for consumption will likely decrease in future
decades. That of course doesn't say much about what the dollar price of oil
will do, but I can say with confidence that if oil keeps rising it will be due
to monetary factors, and in particular continued growth of the dollar and euro
supply beyond the demand for dollars and euros. Oil will not rise due to
traditionally recognized supply and consumption demand factors, in fact due to
the current overinvestments in oil and alternative energies the percentage of
the oil price attributable to such "fundamentals" will continue to decrease.  
  
We often live under a grand illusion that that the dollar is a stable standard
of value and thus the dollar prices for commodities provide an accurate
measure of supply and consumption demand for those commodities. They don't,
and it's not even close. The supply and demand for the dollars is the far more
dominant factor, and on top of that the demand for commodities as money rather
than for consumption becomes, in times of inflation, much more important than
"fundamentals." Those who just look at dollar prices have a wildly distorted
view of economic reality.  
  
Oil prices today reflect the best consensus estimate of what oil prices will
be in the future. Regardless of how high oil prices get, they don't provide
substantially more incentive to pump, because how high they are today doesn't
say anything more than low prices about whether prices will be higher or lower
five years from now. These commodities behave very differently from a widget
where you either make it now or lose the sale. Furthermore, oil prices in
terms of other commodities have not risen substantially, and the oil companies
and countries understand that their increased wealth as measured in dollars or
euros is partly an illusion (because its is the value of the dollar and to a
lesser extent the euro that has dropped, not value for consumption of oil that
has increased) and partly a matter of extra demand for commodities as money
that would disappear if the Fed got its act together, as it did in the 1980s
and 1990s.  
  
The monetary function of commodities can be seen from all the dreaded hoarding
that is going on. With the failure of the dollar people need extra commodities
in the "vault", even if these vaults are just the pantries of third-world
families or the warehouses of governments.  
  
Oil is mostly not hoarded directly above ground, because it is much more
expensive to store above ground than to just keep it in the ground to pump
later. When oil futures are used as money, this discourages pumping, despite
the high oil prices, and that's exactly what we're seeing. If oil had no
monetary function we'd see a huge increase in pumping, but instead we're
seeing oil hoarding in the form keeping the oil in the ground and selling more
oil futures backed by that unpumped oil. Practically all major oil countries
are currently pumping below their potential output, and it is again a gross
violation of Occam's Razor to explain this as a matter of a wide variety of
political problems that just happen to all be occuring at the same time. These
countries on average have no more political problems than they did during the
1980s and 1990s. They are under-pumping because the demand for oil as money,
that is as backing for oil futures and other oil derivatives, dictates that
more oil be stored relative to consumption, and that this oil be stored in the
lowest cost way, i.e. that it be kept in the ground.  
  
There are probably more than $10 trillion worth of commodity derivatives
outstanding today, a vast increase over less than $2 trillion five years ago.
Nothing like this volume of derivatives are needed to simply hedge commodity
production and consumption. Instead this volume is demanded for use as a money
substitutes or to, equivalently, hedge assets denominated in government
currencies. It's much like fractional reserve banking -- commodity derivatives
are a money substitute or hedge based on a much smaller value of commodities
that have to be "stored in the vault" for use at "redemption windows",
especially in cases of "runs on the bank." During such runs we will see big
spikes in commodity prices completely unrelated to commodity "fundamentals."
Indeed, we've likely seen something like that during the recent and still
ongoing credit crunch. (The comparison to fractional reserve banking is, of
course, just analogical -- modern commodity derivatives markets are their own
beast, and perhaps not well understood by anybody, but I think this analogy
gives as good an insight as anybody has into what is going on).  
  
Oil prices have also been driven up by the above-ground hoarding of more
storable commodities, again because these commodities are increasingly being
used as a substitute for the dollar and the many dollar-linked currencies.
This increases the demand for such commodities, which increases the demand for
oil used to produce the commodities. But this, like the direct excess demand
for oil futures, goes away if or when the dollar resumes stability or another
stable currency takes over from the dollar.  
  
In short, we are increasingly seeing commodities used as a substitute for and
hedge against dollars and dollar-linked currencies, and to a lesser extent as
a substitute for euros, by a very wide range of people from third-world
families and governments to the most sophisticated international traders. The
recent large run-up in commodity prices is explained by this factor. Commodity
prices will continue to reflect a strong demand for their use as a monetary
substitute until the time when monetary policy becomes far less inflationary
than it is now.

