George, that suggests one of the reasons why my version is better as well as
being far more general in application. There is usually no one "the reason"
that is sufficient to justify or refute the justification of a complicated
institution, and this is often even true for personal decisions. One reason,
especially just the naive application of a particular ideological theory, is
usually woefully insufficient evidence for favoring tearing down the "fence."  
  
The following is a better approach than Chesterton's, albeit somewhat more
involved. It applies to almost every non-trivial decision we make about either
ourselves, our investments, or our institutions. Indeed, it even tells us when
we should make decisions and when we should put them off:  
  
(1) Presume, in the absence of sufficient evidence to the contrary as
described in (2), that the complex institution or investment or prior personal
decision is still justified. In other words, maintain stability in your life
and in our social lives until a sufficient threshold for change has been met.  
  
(2) To the extent one is unsatisfied with the institution/investment/personal
decision, fairly gather evidence for and against the utility of said state of
affairs.  
  
(3) To the same kind of extent, consider alternative states of affairs.  
  
(4) When the quality of evidence both for and against becomes sufficiently
high, as well as the weight of evidence against - (weight of evidence for +
(discount factor)*(sunk cost of state of affairs)) becoming sufficiently
greater than zero, abandon the institution or investment or personanl decision
in favor of the best alternative state of affairs you or we are comparing it
to. The lower the quality of evidence, the higher the discount factor -- lower
quality evidence means weight the proxy measure of sunk costs more highly.  
  
(4a) One can derive an adjusted net present value calculation from (4) for
analyzing investments.  
  
You can consider the absurdity of never considering sunk costs, by considering
how frantic and pointless your life would be if your were constantly
reconsidering every decision you made, and never trusting any decision of
anybody else. To the extent you don't want to live such a preposterously
hyper-rational lifestyle, we must guide ourselves by procedures similar to the
above.  
  
This may well be a good approximation of what our subconscious minds do
naturally, when we are not brainwashed by superficial hyper-rationality into
ignoring our supposed "biases" and "fallacies". Albeit, such high weightings
of sunk costs are probably not as suitable for cases, more common now than in
our evolutionary environments, but still probably a small minority of cases,
where we have better evidence and better capacity to consider that evidence
than the original decision makers, or substantially different preferences than
they, or both.

