 _Oil may actually have a lower dilution rate than gold._  
  
Oops, I missed this sentence. I suspect oil's dilution rate is only slightly
higher than gold's, and that only at high collectible premiums and due to
substitutability of consumption rather than increased production at high
collectible premiums. I suspect some other minerals (perhaps copper, iron,
natural gas, etc.) also fall in the category of cheap to store unextracted as
an inflation hedge, although not as good as oil in this regard because the
cost of extracting them is higher. Of course, the cost of extracting gold and
silver are also relatively higher than the cost of extracting oil. For the
commodities which are more expensive to extract but cheaper to store above
ground, the above-ground inventory is far more important than the above-ground
inventory of oil.  
  
 _the cash flow from stocks varies with monetary inflation. And monetary
inflation is very hard to predict._  
  
Stocks vary greatly in the degree to which they provide an inflation hedge. In
a stagflation economy (e.g. the 1970s), which we seem to be re-entering, the
profits on most stocks do not increase to keep up with inflation, and can lag
terribly. Most companies do not have enough hard assets to hedge against
inflation, they are leveraged to various degrees, their customers may or may
not pay the much higher nominal prices they will have to charge to remain
profitable, etc. Stock indices in nominal terms ended the 1970s about where
they began, but in real terms went down by about a factor of 10, rivalling
their collapse in the early years of the Great Depression. This may be
happening again.  
  
 _Equities have dilution rates as low as gold ( as an effect of Sarbox), great
tax advantages, lots of marketing dollars backing them, and the support of
government policies._  
  
I don't understand how you conclude that stocks have low dilution, or what
that has to do with Sarbanes-Oxley. That's quite an intriguing comment,
though.  
  
My understanding is that the assets and liabilities of companies are so varied
in nature and fluid one can't generalize about their ability to hedge
inflation, except to note that their overall track record in stagflation, as
noted above, is very poor.  
  
Outside of large financial companies, I see very little support from the feds
and much negative for shareholders. The feds now care far more about labor
unions than shareholders, and only care about a few politically very visible
companies like GM and Chrysler. The perceived (at least) screwing of
bondholders may be driving up the costs of credit for U.S. corporations and
quite possibly has helped to dramatically drive up the costs of U.S. Treasury
bonds over the past few weeks.

