Jeremy, I share your concerns, and those concerns are just why I'm so
enthusiastic about authority from things. In its ideal form the authoritative
object cannot be manipulated by any human or group of humans, no matter how
powerful. To the extent we can approach this ideal we reduce our
vulnerabilities to gaming and centralization of authority.  
  
As something that comes quite close to this ideal, think of a pulsar as a time
standard. A pulsar sits far beyond the distance where it can be subject to any
human manipulation, sending out a precisely regular strobe. As long as you
control a machine that picks up this signal directly, nobody else can defraud
you as to what time it is.  
  
With current technology it's too expensive for the vast majority of people,
including me, to pick up a pulsar radio signal with our own receivers. So I
have to rely on some other people to pick up the signal (or, as it really
works today, measure the signal of atomic clocks of the same kind) and tell me
what time it is: I have to rely on some communications and some trust, or at
least on some security beyond my control. If I talk directly to the people who
do have such radio receivers, then if at least one over a half of these people
are reliable a minority of colluding liars can't defraud me. I can tell
something untoward is going on in a debugged system even with a small number
of errors, but if fewer than half are defrauding me, I still know what the
time is. The more uncontrolled and independent people I talk to the more
restitant I am to manipulation or fraud by a powerful person or group.  
  
In practice, because time can ultimately be measured against astronomical
objects beyond reach, and proximately based on regular mechanical or standard
atomic movements, it has long been difficult for central authorities to
defraud people in most ways about the time. There are stories that employers
once used to add few minutes to every hour back when they controlled the only
clock in the factory, but if so this became impossible when at least a few
employees started carrying pocket watches.  
  
It's an interesting question as to whether the U.S. government ever has or
could undetectably defraud GPS users. Fortunately the EU is launching an
alternative called Galileo which will make this even less likely.  
  
Traditionally we have come up with many processes to greatly improve the
reliability of communications: tamper-evidence (as in sealed letters),
physical broadcast (where it's hard to prevent people from receiving
accurately what was broadcast), hard-to-forge audit trails, separation of
duties, scientific methods of repeating experiments, and so on.  
  
The cryptographic research community studies protocols with very strong
mathematical properties, such that (most likely) one would have to expend vast
amounts of energy, often even more energy than is available in the entire
universe, to break the protocol. Encryption, digital signatures, mulitparty
secure computation, and a variety of other useful protocols probably have such
strong properties.  
  
Real implementations, alas, don't quite live up to this ideal and are
sometimes cracked. But overall cryptography can provide a great leap up in the
security of a variety of communications, such as the unalterability of audit
trails. Thus I foresee a future in which automata as authority will become far
more reliable and secure and will replace many weaker traditional methods. As
a result we'll have a much more secure basis on which to trust our six billion
plus fellow strangers with much less reliance than in the past on central
authorities.

