eddie, good questions. I'm obviously still figuring out the best way to
explain this, so hopefully this one will do the trick.  
  
(n.b. I've been using "bank note" instead of "coin" and "bit gold" or
"solution bits" instead of "grains", and "issuer" instead of "mint", and there
are good reasons I chose this terminology, but for the purpose of this
response I'll use your terminology).  
  
 _How do the mints determine how many of which grains to mint into a coin, and
how do users determine that a coin has the right set of grains?...You suggest
that the prices of grains will be determined in a market, but I don't
understand how such a market would come about._  
  
It's more than a suggestion. The "mints" (issuers) don't decide this for
themselves, the traders on the inter-period exchanges do. The value of one
unit of the currency is defined as the value of a canonical number of bits in
the "grains" of some canonical period. So for example, the value of 1024 bits
of grains in week 1 (the "genesis grains"). However grains from other periods
are used to actually redeem "coins".  
  
The market comes about as with other collectible markets. For example traders
in rare postage stamps estimate how much luck was involved in the variety of
printing errors that occur in the stamps most prized by collectors. The
difference from collectible stamps being that the markets in "grains"
(solution bits) will be far more liquid because trading will be largely
automated with instant online clearing, because it's being used as reserves
for a currency, and because it's simplified to trading between periods
(probably weeks) rather than trading between individual stamps or "grains".  
  
 _But the number they need depends on the price they pay!_  
  
The specific grains in the bundle are determined when "coins" are redeemed,
not when they are issued ("minted"). The mint/issuer can be audited at issue
time (or any other time) to see if they have sufficient reserves of grains to
cover the "coins" they have issued, but they don't distribute these reserves
unless the "coin"/"bank note" is redeemed.  
  
Each "coin" is most akin to a digital promissory note (this is why I call them
"bank notes"): I promise to redeem "coins"/"bank notes", on demand, for grains
adding up to the standard value at the time of redemption. Since the prices of
grains are all public, the redeemer and issuer/mint can each look up the
market prices of the grains at that time and verify that they add up to the
standard value. Determining the relative prices is obvious. The abolute value
of a grain created in a given week is determined by comparing the price of
grains created in what week to the price of a canonical time period (e.g. the
week 1 or "genesis grains".) So the value of one "coin" of standard value can
be defined as "the value of 1024 bits of genesis grains", but when you redeem
the "coin"/"bank note" it gets redeemed in later grains according to their
relative market prices to the genesis grains, which both sides of the
redemption transaction can verify.

