Modern legal commentators often refer to property rights as "mere economic
rights." Epstein and others have argued against a strong distinction between
economic and personal rights. This article argues that some kinds and aspects
of property rights, especially those associated with owning, renting, or
providing a residence, a communications service, or an article or servcie
associated with a family or other intimate relationship, are much more than
economic rights. Besides possibly falling under the Takings Clause, these
property rights also fall under the Due Process Clause, the First or Fourth
Amendments, or other constitutional rights depending on the nature of the
property. Such property rights cannot consistently with the Constitution be
taken merely by monetary compensation, even if taken for a public use, but may
be taken or unduly burdened by regulation only if they are forfeit due to
lawbreaking of the property owner or if a full and complete equivalent to the
violated right is provided.  
  
Although property law is commonly considered a branch of substantive rather
than procedural law, this is a highly misleading categorization for the
purposes of constitutional interpretation. Traditionally, obligations and
rights associated with residence and property were at the core of common law
procedural rights. "Due process" was and is considered synonymous with "the
law of the land." "The law of the land" was guaranteed by the Magna Carta.
Several state constitutions still protect "the law of the land" rather than
"due process", but courts have always considered them to be synonymous. "The
law of the land," under traditional common law, referred to core righs of
property, person, and procedure that could be pled in the king's courts using
the extraordinary writs, particularly _quo warranto_ , _habeus corpus_ , and
prohibition. _Quo warranto_ could not be used to take certain property rights
unless those rights had been abused in violation of law and unless proper
legal procedure was observed, just as under _habeus corpus_ a person could not
be imprisoned unless he or she was a lawbreaker and proper procedure was
observed. Indeed the phrase "common law" originally referred, not to the
"judge made law" of the king's courts generally, but only to that subset of
the law that the king's courts could apply, via the extraordinary writs, in
all parts of the land including against the many private (franchise) and
Church courts. This is also the cf core meaning of "the law of the land" and
"due process."  
  
So much did the Framers of the United States Constitution considered property
to be the core and paradigmatic constitutional right that they often (as in
this essay) referred to intangible rights such as freedom of speech,
association, belief as property rights in order to afford them greater
protection. The Framers did not make a sharp distinction between property and
other rights, and they certainly did not dismiss property rights as "merely
economic."  
  
These core common law rights could not be taken by mere compensation, but only
due to illegal behavior by the rightsholder that forfeited the property right
under law. Although these rights often referred to jurisdictional rights no
longer recognized today, they also referred to rights that still have modern
forms, such as "view of frankpledge," a local private police force whose
modern forms include neighborhood watch programs and other community groups,
"advowson", associated with community religious practice, and various rights
to take action against people breaking the law on one's property or within
one's residence, such as liberty of the house, with modern equivalents in
"stand your ground" and other self-defense laws as well as Fourth Amendment
rights restricting searches of residences and other property where there is a
reasonable expectation of privacy.  
  
Although many of these rights associated with residence, community, and
jurisdiction now take a very different form, Due Process rights still include
rights to build relationships with one's neighbors and community for safety,
security, religion and other purposes that are more than economic. Then as
now, personal jurisdiction was based on the location of one's residence. At
the core of these rights is the right to live in the residence and
neighborhood itself. Due Process rights also include special rights of safety,
security, privacy, and self-defense within one's own residence. A regulation
or property taking that does not provide a full substitute for such rights,
rather than mere monetary compensation, and whether for public use or
otherwise, violates core Due Process rights.  
  
When jurisdiction, search and seizure rights, and rights of self-defense,
among many other procedural rights, are based on property, a taking of that
property, or a regulation that impacts such a right, may be a violation of Due
Process rights. If so, the taking or regulation may not be accomplished by
mere compensation. Rather, when Due Process rights are associated with
property, this either poses an absolute bar to government action or requires a
full substitution of the specific rights violated.  
  
Furthermore, the rights of privacy, recognized as protected by Due Process
Clause, are often associated with residence. As Justice Kennedy wrote in
_Lawrence v. Texas:_  
  

> Liberty [under the Due Process Clause] protects the person from unwarranted
government intrusions into a dwelling or other private places...

>

> This, as a general rule, should counsel against attempts by the State, or a
court, to define the meaning of the relationship or to set its boundaries
absent injury to a person or abuse of an institution the law protects. It
suffices for us to acknowledge that adults may choose to enter upon this
relationship in the confines of their homes and their own private lives and
still retain their dignity as free persons. When sexuality finds overt
expression in intimate conduct with another person, the conduct can be but one
element in a personal bond that is more enduring. The liberty protected by the
Constitution allows homosexual persons the right to make this choice.

The home itself is often another important element of family and other
intimate relationships. When property is associated with personal
relationships, intimate behavior, the expression of personal beliefs, or the
protection of one's safety and privacy, it takes on special constitutional
meaning and is entitled to greater constitutional protection. Many common
individual rights enforced against the government inherently include property
rights and freedom of contract (rights of property in motion). For example,
the right to birth control and abortion includes the property rights to own
birth control and abortion clinics and the freedom of contract to buy and sell
birth control devices and abortion services. Freedom of the press includes the
right to own a newspaper, to buy and sell newspapers on one's own terms, to
hire journalists and editors and control their work, to contribute to
political campaigns, and to spend money on political compaigns. Similarly, the
Fourth Amendment and the Due Process Clause should include the property rights
associated with those rights, such as property rights to the protected home,
curtilage, and other areas with a reasonable expectation of privacy under the
Fourth Amendment. A taking or regulation of such areas should require the
government to provide equivalent privacy and security functions of buildings
and other features, or be barred altogether from the regulation or taking,
rather than mere monetary compensation, even when taken for a public use. Many
constitutional rights have at their core rights of property and property in
motion (contract) that are entitled to enhanced protection since they are not
"merely" economic rights.  
  

> >

