David Mercer and Christopher Allen: I think you are definitely onto something.
A good contemporary example are the Hutterian communes that fission after they
reach between 100-200 people.  
  
However, I don't know if I agree with Marvin Harris. In modern times people
voluntarily join corporations with hundreds of thousands of employees, so
large organization certainly does not require internal or immediate coercion.
If instead Harris is saying that large organizations require property rights
which in turn require police powers, he may be more accurate, but that
analysis applies only under certain conditions and not others.  
  
Per David Mercer's comment, tribes, clans, and even individual families could
and did farm land. The growing part is easy, the security not so easy. For
most of history military organizations were the largest organizations, and
almost surely the first organizations to exceed the size of tribes. This due
in turn to the economies of scale in securing farmland.  
  
While property rights always require some degree of security, that security
doesn't necessarily come in the form of police powers. My more general thesis
is that the productivity and security characteristics of a form of wealth
determine optimal property rights structure. Farmland is the dominant form of
wealth during almost all of written history, and thus has played a dominant
role in shaping our current legal and political forms, but these aren't the
only forms possible.  
  
In the case of fixed property such as farmland and oil fields the need for
military/police powers is extensive. Since farmlands have been the dominant
form of wealth until quite recently large organizations have never been too
far removed from the military organizations needed to secure that wealth.
However, such an association is not necessarily going to occur where other
kinds of property predominate.  
  
Mike Gomez: I don't know how well land can be collateralized in the China at
present. However, if the periodic payments on the lease are less than the
amortized value of the land and there are reliable records about all this, the
lease is an asset which one could, if allowed by law and the terms of the
lease, buy or sell or use as collateral. This is common for long-term
commercial leases developed countries.  
  
Indeed, the "fee simple" by which land is owned in British Commonwealth
countries is in its origin just a perpetual feudal lease from the Crown. (In
contrast to "alloidal" absolute ownership common before the Norman Conquest).
The Magna Carta, and some subsequent developments by which our political
rights evolved, were viewed at the time as a negotiation between the Crown's
immediate tenants (barons) and the Crown governing terms of such leases
(including also the more common inalienable "fee tail"). Under such a regime
property taxes were equivalent to rent, and indeed were often paid up from
landlord to super-landlord to the ultimate landlord, the Crown. Under this
regime the Crown has alloidal title which gives it police powers on its
property ("the realm"). In feudal times sub-lords also had some police powers.
In exchange for these rents and police powers, by the terms of leases such as
Magna Carta the Crown had to give tenants some rights.  
  
Occasionally private companies were given or usurped alloidal rights which
included police powers (such as the East India Company, the Congo Independent
State, Anglo-Belgian Indian Rubber Co., and so on). These companies used
police powers to extract "rent" from their subjects, leading to rather severe
abuses for the former inhabitants or owners of those lands. The victims did
not participate in the negotiation of leases, but had leases forced upon them
by conquest.  
Of course, governments have perpetrated abuses as bad or worse. The general
lesson is that, whether "public" or "private," there need to be severe
controls put on the exercise of police powers.

