I have heard a lot here and in other places in regards to "can we really trust Craig". I have to say. Have you learnt nothing?

No, you should not blindly trust anyone. Trust is earned. Even then it is never absolute other than for fanatics and fools and I desire a world with neither as unlikely as that is.

Yes, we have patents. Yes, people have had ideas of things that would be good to have/do/create etc.  

Here is the thing. Ideas are worth a puddle of piss. If you cannot make something that can be used, it is not worth shit.

Now, here is the point. Stop trying to find a leader. Stop trying to have a person/group/spirit etc to trust blindly.  *COMPETE*. Do not think what I can or cannot do. Do not think it is not fair. Get out there and compete. Fail. Fail hard! Fail again and learn from it, over and over. One day, you will start to really learn. Not the shit they teach in school, but life and work and that you are not owed anything and if you want something, get off your ass and build it. Do not have an idea. Build a working system. Patents are of use as they force you to create something that can be built. A system that can be coded, created and produced, not a simple idea.

Warp drives and Space elevators (and Bitcoin VSats) are ideas. These sound cool and they do nothing but offer false hope and broken dreams.

Here is another point, *life is not fair, it never was, it never will be and equality is a shit idea by losers for losers!*

So, in place of telli9ng me how unfair things are... DO SOMETHING! Compete! Fight. Strive.

I DO NOT want your trust. I want your competition! I want you to fight me. To build faster and better than I can. I am, even with a team, just one man. There are billions of people on this Earth. I cannot out code, out think and out create everyone and as we build we are all better. Manufacture is soon to be obsolete as machines do this better. Transport, soon obsolete. What we need is to have people think. You are not owed a living. You have *NO RIGHT* to a job. Work is a privilege that you need to *EARN!*

So, start demonstrating what you can do. Stop me patenting some idea by getting in there FIRST!