The battle to come is the real battle. We are fighting and squabbling like children and all this does is allow fiat to grow, to let Visa stop Bitcoin cards to allow the existing system to remain in dominance. 

I hate Ghandi's socialist bent, but he was right in one way. Sometimes you need to stop pushing back.

My past is a little unbelievable. I have 17 degrees not as I had something to prove, but as I love study and I find that formal education is a means to ensure that I do not take the easy way out. Each day we awake to make a choice. Do I get up and work and study or do I lay in and enjoy. That is at first a difficult decision. It was for me. There are so many things, so many good restaurants, so many good times I have missed in working and studying. The evidence is there for that, but it will not be for everything. All things come with costs and there are ways to attack using the truth and there are those who would attack what I am doing. Lightning and traditional settlement systems, AML and controlled power-bases suit some well. 

So, the choice to have formal education and tell others was a decision. I can do it on my own, but when there is money on the line, we act in accord to that input. By announcing that I am in a degree, and paying money, I set a goal that is easier to achieve. IF and it is an IF they find a supervisor for my research proposal, I have applied for a third doctorate. Not as I have to prove anything, not as this makes me special, but as a means to ensure that I do not stop. It is a self imposed economic incentive.

Jihan has invested time and money into Bitcoin. More than all the Blockstream / Core people combined. I understand the smear techniques. I have been through them as you are I am certain aware. I am however learning and I have seen that Steel is made in the fire and through being hammered and I do not break. 

Barry and others fear and attack. What they will learn is that once we start to see through them it no longer matters. I have learnt the zen art of not giving a fuck. I took my first company to listing (and then spent years in court with a 5% investor as a separate story) at 29. I have more money now than even Barry and crew would know what to do with. 

Bitcoin is going to win. 

That is what I am here for. That is why I will not go away. They can say I am a criminal. And they will in time just be more and more exposed for the frauds they are. I am here in the UK and I can travel back to Australia. Each time they state how I am on the run and yet appear publicly, they show their lies. Each lies grows and in time the will start to crumble.

Yes. I have something to prove.

I need to prove that Bitcoin can be all it can be.
