Here we see the mindless drone. He calls ‘fraud’ as this is all he can do. He cannot offer more. He is far too simple to accept anything else nor to explain so rather than think, he opens his mouth and calls and insults and kicks and screams. 
"You must do as we say". When you do not, they kick and scream and cry for the world to hear.

Bitcoin is about transacting with another and yet not needing to prove more. It is about privacy. It is not being forced nor coerced into having to do anything. It is plausible deniability.

So, as for prove it, well, the assumption is that I care to. This is the flaw. The burden is on our Mr Contrarian. I personally am in a really good place. I have no plans to help or hinder any causes nor do I desire to be a figurehead or any other thing. 
So, very simply, I will demonstrate to our highly respected friend here that his cries mean for naught. Without any knowledge nor facts, he calls for me to fill in the blanks.
Did you know what the right for privacy is?
It means not needing to feed the trolls and not having to do anything for them. It means having to only prove what is required for a particular event, contract or exchange. What others feel about this means zilch. 
Having an immutable record allows you to decide what, how and when you want to offer something and it also in Bitcoin means that we can withhold evidence, withhold proof or withhold facts from others. 
Do you not like this?
If that is so, what are you doing in a Bitcoin forum? Bitcoin is a sovereign form of money, a means of exchange, one that allows uncensored and irreversible transactions. This I whether these are for gambling, escorts, food to feed one’s family, one’s savings as one flees a dictator or generally a mild sense of paranoia when dealing with the government and others. 

It is always simple to see the loud screams of hypocrisy as the simple minded cannot accept what they propose to hold close. You cannot be a supporter of privacy and crusade when nobody asks you to. To force this upon the world is to use force to propel your own agenda. Not for truth, but for self-aggrandisement. 

Have a nice weekend. I am.