ArisKataris, I am not here to prove I am Satoshi.  That is not and never has been my objective.  The best outcome from myself is that I disprove others where needed and ensure that there is no 'king' and the protocol is competitive.

If the Bitcoin community blindly follow someone for the sole reason that they believe that person to be Satoshi, JUST BECAUSE he says he is Satoshi, then we as a community have failed. Even if Satoshi was proven, and this would never be by choice, following any authority blindly is a mistake.  You are more than welcome to critique my papers and my technical arguments.  Critique and question constructively, and I will answer what you need to know. I will NOT be entertaining personal questions, nor shall I respond to any personal attacks but if you choose to debate technical issues on Bitcoin, or if you have any pertinent concerns associated with the Bitcoin protocol,  then I will be happy to engage in a discourse with you. 

This includes the protocol, the politics that have developed to move the system towards a central control away from competitive forces as well as the maths and econometric aspects of the system. 

This dibattere [1] as to the origin and person is counter productive and harms all who care to grow Bitcoin.  The purpose we must embrace is to form a competitive community that together can disrupt finance.  Disruption is never easy nor is it assured.  The only way to assure it succeeds is to unite.  Not blindly and not following a single idea, but as a competitive marketplace where ideas can be expressed and where they live or die on their merits alone. 

To survive, Bitcoin must become the meritocracy it was designed to be, not the technocratic swamp it is becoming.  All who express solutions have a right to try these and all have the right to fail.  Not through the gated vault that Blockstream have imposed, but through choice.  In Bitcoin, ideas are expressed and voted on economically.  Miner and others with "skin in the game" vote and risk all they have and this is what makes the system work.  Ideas are tested when we are willing to risk and lose all we have and in this way, we ensure that the best come to the fore. 

[1] Argumentative debate or fight