It is a boondogle used by those seeking to hide the truth.

From an upcoming paper:

"Finally, we can address the feasibility of such a system. A large-scale quantum computer will not be a system that ever scales along the lines of more traditional computer and Moore's law. Some orders of growth may be possible, but it is also feasible that the systems will remain as large-scale specialist systems requiring oversized facilities to manage and maintain them. In the best case, we see a facility costing in the order of $1 billion US as a minimum. Even given this theoretical best case scenario, we could expect costs between 150 and $200 million US including depreciation to cover the operational range of this machine. Again it the best case scenario we would have a situation where a machine that costs in the order of $150 million US per annum to run would be able to crack 12 private keys in a single year. To make sense, the creation of such a system dedicated to cracking bitcoin keys would need to find abandoned public keys that hold Bitcoin valued at $12.5 million each on a consistent basis. As we have demonstrated, it is simple to move between bitcoin addresses and to use a combination of multisig addresses and hash puzzles to thwart any attack in an active organisation. We also cannot forget that quantum computers cannot attack bitcoin addresses where the public key has not been exposed.
At present, the largest individual bitcoin address holds an amount equal in value to $150 million US  in a single address. This it seems is viable to attack. However, remember the simple solution if this was to be exposed such that the public key on this address was known would be to move the funds to another address. This can be done in under 10 minutes. An attack using a quantum computer would require over a month. Even this address is safe. The largest address with an exposed public key  (from 2014) holds a balance of only $14.5 Million USD. Individually, this address from 2014 could be attacked profitably. The problem is that a quantum computer dedicated to reversing bitcoin public addresses would need to find several hundred such addresses all holding an average of 12.5 million USD in Bitcoin. The totality of such addresses at present would not pay for four months of operation of this machine."

"Quantum algorithms Including Shor’s require a substantial overhead in mapping the problem you want to solve onto the QC architecture. Consequently, the arguments on how many qubits are needed are wrong. You will require much more than N qubits to do what would classically take 2N steps. The ECDSA curve in Bitcoin has "Good protection against quantum computers unless Shor’s algorithm applies" ( ). We can conclude that we have at least until 2030 - 2040 and this is more than sufficient time to change the algorithm if it was necessary. SHA 256 with QC has until at least 2080, and the likely attack is not quantum computers. The runtime bottleneck of Shor's algorithm is quantum modular exponentiation, which means that the (re)introduction of OP_Mod in Bitcoin script (and the alterations this can provide to key security -  ) makes QC based solutions infeasible and takes the algorithm past 2080. We are sure that people will have other solutions before 2080."