See Greg, this is where you demonstrate that you have no idea how money works, how commerce works nor for that matter what the world is all about. 

The call to have the other party show Tom the money was a negotiation tactic. Tom was an agent and was representing an in-demand client who many parties wanted and were bidding for.

You are not my agent. I can afford people who are expensive and not simply incompetent as an agent as you would be. Though expensive does not equal good I do admit, that is an option.

So, you have all of nothing that I want. Nothing I cannot work around, no influence that matters and no power any more, just the shell of what was once there. You do not see that yet, but you will. In time, other members of Core shall as well see this, and for those who are not inadequate toxic want to be’s who have divided communities and delivered negative value, there will be space for them. Just not you.

Now, the issue that you really have is that you want me to show you the money when you have absolutely nothing. You want something from me. Yet you have nothing in exchange, not a thing that I value. This makes you a virtual pan handler. I must say that you do at times look at part and I would recommend at least trimming the beard, people would take you a little more seriously. So, the reality would be that you need to show me the money. You require something of me.

So, you call as a pan handler. You plead and beg, but I do not give to pan handlers Greg. 

This is of course the issue that you have. You do not have enough money. Core all together and the DCG and all your minions do not have enough money to sway me. Roger does not pay me. Claim all you like, it is funny. Neither do I work for Calvin. We are friends. Then, I do not see that you would understand this. So, remember when all you trolls ridiculed me in 2015 saying how someone like me would never have links to gaming… I guess that you never bothered to look at the people who are behind gaming or that one of the guys who was behind the first global online licence casino may have been involved a lot longer in the industry?

I can choose what I do and do not disclose Greg. That is freedom. I have it. You know, I can control my information. I can do this absolutely now. Not as you or even the “community” want anything, but as I choose. You will start to see this. 

We have started showing the money Greg, just, not to you. Some here have already started receiving investments. This again is the great thing with Bitcoin, I do not need to disclose who we invest in. I guess you also overlooked this. Enjoy your obsolescence. This is my last dig. It is the last of any anger I have. Now things change. Please enjoy your obsolescence as we show up your lies and untruths one by one, not at your timetable, at ours. 

Remember what you feared most? You have created it in attacking me.

So, Greg, you are not going to have anything. Just a forgotten footnote. Consider this a good bye. You have nothing left that can anger me. Nothing to insult me in a manner that matters. 

The thing with trolls, they end up alone and pitiful. 