Trusting the encryption vs. human or a group of human is great. 

The ecosys - less cars the better.  Yes, it's that emotional need thing that we get hooked on
the TV ads.  I propose to:

Replace individual ownership of cars with fully meshed rails and buses like NYC and Tokyo.
No more fighting for Middle East oil (bring back our kids and save their kids, no more billions
spent ea. day), no more fracking, no more oil spills on our precious shores
and ocean at large, no more digging earth to mine Fe, Al, Cu, (and mine plastic?) to pollute our
water and air and scenery.  Imagine 1.4 billion + 1.3 billions + ... all want to buy cars as here
in US's 320 million.  When we USA discard individually owned cars, we can show the world how
beautiful our nation would be.  All those wide, multi-lane freeways (and turn pikes) would be condensed
to 2 - 3 train tracks with local rails and bus connections.  We also don't need wide local streets and
even small streets.  Use those freed land to plant more trees and parks.  How do we do this?

Put $35/gallon tax on the gasoline instead of ~$.50/gal and everyone would start not driving even 
for local errands.  Your gas price would be $40/gal.  If you have a big truck or suv, it's $80 just to
drive from my town to the other end of Pasadena (~7 miles x 2).  When that happens, you won't see many cars on the freeways anymore.  And, you won't see only one person/car for the few you see.
A single short rail car can seat ~30 people in the space of only 3 separated moving automobile on the 
freeway with only one person ea. in it - more advantage can be seen when the cars are bumper to 
bumper where as when the rail cars get B2B (with couplers), we can put more people inside in less
space.  No need to have multi lanes.  Use the collected tariff $$ to fully mesh with public rail 
and buses for short distances.

Use more bikes like in Europe and Asia for a few blocks to the bus/rail stations if you do not
wish to walk though you should if you can. I do use my bike for groceries, banks, classes, post office, 
library, local friend visits, hardware sto, ... and for my entertainment, a pure pleasure of riding my
bike down the beautiful parks, river, ocean path, and other bike path.  I only drive my car once in two 
weeks and none/month if I was not forced to.  In fact, I my old battery died for not driving 2 months
one time.

Protocol - PP?  Great.  It sure got simplified from X.25 when our equipment were unreliable.