Our econ is not of the last 2 decades ago.  There are too much meddling by those few in
control of our monetary system.

The economic recession bubble used to come at or near the end of the decade if you trace
far to 1929 and before that.  But the last decade was different.  We had two in the same
decade.  This was the meddling of our Feds and the legislature based on the financial institutions
requests to do so (get legislative approvals for subprime lendings, derivatives, mortgauge back 
trust, ...).  To print more money to keep it cheap so even poor people can buy cars and houses.
Because of the cheap loan rates, the prices go up but the inflation factor was denied by our Fed 
Res. Chairman recently to sustain this paper $$ pumping.

Normally, at the end of the decade, our goods (appliance, tools, curtains, cars, ...) are already
 bought (replaced) and people stop buying.  So, when the investors see the sales/profit goes 
down, they pull out their stakes out of the companies.  The corp directors see this and demand
 to increase sales but won't go.  The fastest way to show profit is to layoff workers, that 33% 
expense.  And so this decision by the few adds more people stop buying things.  No jobs and
financial worries.  No jobs, No buy, No sale.  It's not normal like that anymore.  And same for
the menial jobs.  Thru our legislature, we allow easy entry to get more cheap labor for what's
remaining, unexportable jobs.  These are service type of industry (hospital, insurance selling, 
banks, restaurants, street labor, bus and truck drivers, janitorial, retail stores, shuffling paper 
jobs like real estate brokers and escrow workers, ...,) of which we're not making any goods to 
sell outside of our  nation, and yet, taking our last unexportable jobs away from us.

Coming back to the professional level, recently, our tech companies asked our legislature to 
increase more imports of foreign tech workers under measure H1b which skirts emigration dept, replacing whatever US citizen engineers working with cheaper workers.  The companies cried out
that there aren't enough engineers in US and not enough of them graduating from colleges.
That is the corporations fault to export our manufacturing sector.  But that is what they've
wanted and to continue to do so.  So not even the small amount of our manufacturing sector that 
survived is destroying our citizens.  All in the name of profit.