Hi Tos3,

I don't spk.  I just write. Here are the languages I've learned:

1.  Japanese
2.  German
3.  Russian
4.  English

When you look into other languages, you'll appreciate how simple
the last one is vs. ones above it.  The word inflections and grammatical cases auf Deutsche get a bit out of hand.  But nothing 
compared to Russian.

You'll recognize too much elaboration, and unnecessary excesses
to learn with too much rules (and some exceptions to the rules that u'll need 2 memorize).  But you need to overcome the
frustration by saying (pacifying), that quirk/excess makes that 
particular language beautiful.  How sweet is that Red lollipop?
Start with German way of counting and Russian way.  The latter
you have more quirks. More memorization for not being more
pattern wise.
 
E.g., I never learned Romantic languages (Italian, French, Spanish,
Roumanian, ...).  But I've notice for the French and Spanish, 
writing, esp. the 3rd is in excess.  In French, half of the word is not pronounced so why waste letters?  And on the Spanish, vs. English, you need to write 2 or 3 more lines, say 8 total vs. English's 5 to say the same thing.  So,despite using the same character set (Latin alpha), you would immediately know there are more
excess.  At times, though the E & S is of different origin (Germanic
vs. Romantic), you'll recognize mapping one to one in words.  And asks why translate.  E.g., Pharmacy vs. Pharmacia?  And same for
French at times.

Geeze, Italians have such beautifully uplifting Mandolin compositions!

I would rather see more efficiency in languages.  I cannot say 
anything about
the Japanese since that was my native language.  Can't really
analyze it.  But I do say the writing system of Kanji is excess.
If we can say with 26 letters in English and 33 in Russian, why
does Kanji needs over 2K letters to say the same thing?  And,
ea. K char has like 6 - 14 strokes vs. Latin alpha's max of 4 (M or
upside down)? Give me a break!  What kind
of memorization effort is that?  The K is only a subset of full
Chinese Characters.  I must admire any Westerners who has
the command of HanJi and one even took Medical exam in Japan
or China with K set, subset or superset.

That's my Toss4+