The Bitcoin block building must conform to the standard protocol and block building/disassembling too but need to be processed more for encryption.  It'll 
take more time and process power of the CPU(s).  Parallel processing of a single
block of message by the multi-node is possible.  Say give the same long block of
10 Mbytes to 3 nearest or 3 available nodes to divide the calculation task or
even feed them 1/3 of the block ea. and have the 1st or 4th node 
to gather the results and make decisions.  This of course requires 
coordination protocol amongst these nodes, which is an overhead.  
I don't know how this is done in Bitcoin servers/nodes.

One of the Bitcoin founder's credos is to serve the poor little guys 
too from the expensive centralized giant bankers for his 
transactions and that credo should also apply to the big corporate type of 
miners too.  We can serve both types of users regardless of 
the blocksize.  See below.

For the little miners vs. the big corporate miners problem...
The blocksize can be increased and yet, can allow the little users
participate.

  Monopolization by a big blocksize user can be controlled by the
  network nodes identifying the user's address and keeping track 
  of their bandwidth usage over a determined sample time.  

If the network bandwidth capacity is available with no other than
the big user at say midnight, let him use up the bandwidth until
someone else knocks the door.  All the network nodes will be notified
about the big user's address while he is streaming continuous large 
blocks.  And, when someone else knocks the door of a node in the 
cloud (network), it can send a reject notice back to 
the big user thru the cloud when he reached the negotiated limit.
It doesn't matter if the big user has many nodes pumping in 
continuous stream of big blocksize simultaneously from many 
entrances (nodes) within the cloud.  All the network nodes are
notified to reject further pumping from the identified big user. 
Thus, the block size is of no concern to allow the little guy in.
Hmmm, how about this big user uses multi IDs?
As a user of internet, I sure want to burst at times with my cheapo 
connection!  I use ISDN 2B+D channel at 128Kbps (that's bits, not bytes/sec
 and I actually get just a bit less than 128K due to the D channel) - aka
DSL on my copper.   I'm like that little Bitcoin miner just sitting there
 wondering when or rather whether his transmission request if not 
actual transmission had been completed.  In the business AM hours
of like 815AM to 9AM, my browser comes up very slow.  The little guy
(me) with a narrow BW if I was a miner will loose my next batch of
customers in Bitcoin against all those companies and businesses 
around my town all booting up and starting internet transactions 
at the same time.  Ok,Ok, are you saying this little kid shouldn't be
in this beeswax?  

Yes, don't laugh, I'm happy I switched back from Charter cable at $60/mo
to $22/mo ISDN.  I can't justify to stay with the cable carrier when 
the lease was about to end earlier this yr and the cable carrier jacked
up the fee from $30 to $60/m.  Hey carrier, why can't u chk up 
on my actual band width usage?  UC, I can't type fast enough to 
do the emails though i can type 50 - 60 wpm.
That's like 55 bytes x 8bits/byte = 440 bits/sec!!!  Even my DSL 
bandwidth at 128Kbps is way too waste of BW.  The em is my main 
usage so why pay for Charter's 60Mbps?  No, I don't want cable TV.  I just 
use an old fashion sky wave to watch all the free 
programs (a hand full of channels) which turn out 2B the only ones 
I want 2C*.  Yes, an occasional youtube viewing stumbles n' gets 
blurry on the DSL.  On the other hand, even during the email 
session, if I want to attach 3M bytes of hi resolution photos on my 
em text, at times, it's so slow to watch the progress bar that I 
want an ability to burst out.  Or like the utube, I want at times,
burst in for movie viewing for like say 12 minutes show.

Frame Relay was one of the protocols that can be negotiated to
be assigned for a short burst, in/out over the contracted bandwidth.

So my stance on the Bitcoin blocksize is it can be of any length, as
long as the network has the capacity.  And yes, it should and
can allow the little miners to get in against the big users regardless
of the blocksize or the little guy's slow CPE or his slow number 
crunching server.

Continued to nxt thrd
