It would be nice for those little miners to burst out as they needed
too!

Yes, longer the blocksize, the less overhead in bytes and process time per
transaction.  So of course, a big user (big miner) with more transactions,
wider bandwidth, and possibly a slightly better (faster) equipment would
want a longer block size.  After all, he's also paying more for his bigger 
bandwidth to his carrier.  He needs to fill the width. But a little user
in the same town with narrower bandwidth and slower equipment can 
also be able to get on-line mit above node signaling.  The entire 
nodes in the cloud have the same critical real-time info all the time,
 instantaneously.  As in Shinkansen hi speed bullet concept as formulated
originally by the JNR, back 50+ yrs ago, which is to separate high speed,
high priority passenger train track, not to be shared by the slow moving
freight trains, Bitcoin if not already, must construct independent high
speed signaling network with short message size (blocksize) away
from message blocks.  I don't mean virtual channel as in the ISDN's D channel
on the same copper wire but totally separate wire or fiber.

What's the cost of this separate, standard gauge (not narrow gauge), 
shortest route (no going around mountains but tunnel
thru them), hi-speed train track for the Bitcoin signaling?

With that independent hi-speed wide track signalling network,
who cares about the blocksize limit?  It's all in the carrier's
and CPE capacity.  But wait, if the signaling messages are short,
you won't need that big bandwidth and therefore, expense.
______________
*I think too many of our TV viewers are brain washed to have
 Cable carriers making them think that a cable TV is a necessary
 utility, in par with his electricity, gas, or even vital water.  Why 
 But pay $88/mo cable when I can watch skywave TV programs
 of great interest without getting frustrated with cable's every 3
 minute drug ads as many of the cable addicts put up with?  I 
 won't.  The cable addicts in reality are PAYING to watch the 
 strings of 5 or even 7 drug ads before they're allowed to watch 
 only 3 minutes of their favorite program.  Dat's stoiped@#$!!!  
 But hey, what about me internet connection w/o the cable?  Oh, 
well, depends on your internet usage.  In my case, I get free TV 
(airwave Aunt Anna TV) and can have the great 128Kbps email 
connection (ISDN) for my meager need of 440bps transmitter
(that xmits with Roman n' Russian fingers dato girls love).

Ciao, Ich Danke Ihnen, я люблю вас, 発現終わり.
Bye, I thank you, I love you, ...