Dear etmetm n' others with similar question about the blocksize,  

For thanking you all here, I would like to entertain you thus -

My knowledge of Bitcoin is of infinitesimal so my write here may 
not apply.  I cannot answer you specifically on how much the max. 
blocksize (which to me is just a message byte size) should be 
increased exactly to 1Meg or even if it should be increased at all.
It all depends on the Customer Premise Equipment (CPE), his 
network bandwidth he's paying, his carrier's network capacity and
the totality of the bandwidth being used at any moment the 
customer needs to transmit/receive.  What I can tell you is:

1.  As a carrier of a network, it is most important to fill the network 
     bandwidth as much as possible at all times.  It spells revenue.

     After all, as a carrier, it spent millions of $$ to lay the
     fiber cables (as Sprint did or had spent $$ to leased the cables 
     from Ma Bell) and paying for them every mo.  On the other 
     hand ...

2.  From the carrier user's perspective (carrier's customer), he
     wants to pay the minimum network cost and equipment per his 
     capacity/requirement.  (See my current carrier switch, from 
     Charter Spectrum 60Mbps cable to ExtremeDSL's ISDN below)

Those were the lessons I've learned as I worked as a Network Systems
Design Engineer for an European telecom carrier, attached
to its sales team.  And, you don't want to over sell the bandwidth 
too far beyond their average use either (see my carrier swap below 
as a network user).  The big enterprising customers do not want to 
pay extra bandwidth (neither am I as a tiny user) and lease/buy 
high performing equipment in excess (i don't buy iPad but would 
like 2 buy we2Pad with my GF instead).  On top of that, the 
potential customer usually is courting another price from another 
carrier!  This threat also holds true for Bitcoin as well.  There are 
other players.  Bitcoin must 'sell' much of the bandwidth capacity 
or capability at lowest price and widest extent possible.  Yet, the 
quality of safety and reliability must be 2nd to none without the
centralization.  Centralization is expensive and slow.  Coming back 
to selling our network service for our carrier sales team, I had to 
map out their existing 'private' network, protocols, the user's 
current average bandwidth use for ea. of their branches, including 
his HQ; and write both the technical and financial proposals.  The 
tech portion of the proposal included for ea. node (his branch) the 
bandwidth allocation, appropriate protocol, and network equipment 
to implement these.

The financial proposal consisted of the cost for these and return on 
their investment figure based on their current revenue associated 
with the network, current network cost, and perhaps, their growth 
potential.   If the customer insists on keeping his current 
(outdated?) CPE, we needed to note that earlier or convince him to
lease our more suitable equipment in the financial proposal.

The duration of the contract is usually 3 yrs.  So, Bitcoin core may 
also need to think about this cycle time of it's own sect.  Phew!

It was my credo to give at least 2 but no more than 3 proposals to 
beat our competition.

For the Bitcoin core team, the team may need to be aware of the 
various telecom carriers' capacities and their network extent
to the targeted customer base.   Not all the locations on this earth
have advanced fiber network and fast CPEs let alone their fast 
number crunching servers.  But what about the return on
the investment (financial and labor of development)?
Or for the little guys in big financial cities and also where large 
data centers are located?  Well, the EZest suggestion from me 
would be to tell the little guys to move out of those areas.  Move 
far away from Google data centers, Facebook, Microsoft, Amazon, 
Las Vegas, Chicago (US telecom and transportation hub), Dublin, 
... Go where the network is available but the capacity is not full.

Now, coming down from the network system level to network
component level.  I've later worked with a team of network 
equipment developers to test and measure throughput of 
voice-data-video routers and switches, including big telephone voice 
switches to come up with better products.  We've pumped
overwhelming amount of dummy messages to multiple channels 
at hi rates to bring down the devices.  We also evaluated our 
equipment vs. the competitions'.  The characterization of the 
equipment and the throughput are pretty much equal amongst the 
makers, including ours.  That makes sense.  The IC components 
and the CPU chips (hardware) are commodities and that the 
software though written by the different teams (companies) need 
to do the same thing to interface with the chips (the primitive software),
implement the standard protocols, and construct/disassemble the 
message block with header and trailer.  A rudimentary error checking 
of the block is performed just B4 sending or upon receiving the block for 
acceptance/rejection of the message.  A long block message
received can be broken down to a manageable packet size as well.  

Continues to next thread