Hi EllsWorth,

I agree and liked your graphic about a single person bringing
a ton of steel [just to get 10 lbs of groceries or 20 lbs of beer cases] from 2 miles away. Here in my town, groceries are only 2 - 3 
blocks for most of residence here, a walking distances.  I use my bike for that task.  I have though a mixed feeling about our LA county supervisor, Mark Ridley-Thomas heading the gang of 11.  The LA MTA had unanimously voted 11 to 0 amongst themselves to make the 
experimental toll Express Lanes permanent but further, to extend the toll to all the lanes in our
freeways.  I wonder if enough LA citizens/drivers-commuters noticed this.  I think the fee for all of the lanes will be $.45/mile for
none rush hours to $1.75/mile on rush hours.  I don't remember their exact quotes.  It doesn't matter what the exact quote is.
Even if 5/$50 cents per mile, once the infrastructure is installed, they can steadily increase every 6 month if they want.  That would make
a commuter from San Bernardino to El Segundo (LAX) costing
him like $75 one way?  Yah, that's not Freeway.  That's No-way!  I don't like their self decision like this without letting the citizens vote against it.  I hope this proposal would be at least voted against in our CA state legislature but with the contractors money, they'll pass it.  We should have a direct vote on this which affects
not just an individual commuters (workers) but would increase the
cost of labor.  Also, we can't now just pay $35 on the shuttle van
to the LAX but would be $150?

On the other hand, it'll eliminate
most of single drivers bringing tons of steel to work.  I did that from my town to the beach area commute many yrs ago.  Also, I used to 
commute from Phila to Wash. DC area for a military contract
work (for US Navy).  The commute on I95 was once a week.  Horrible.  Congested.  Sunday night
from Philly, I get on the saddle to DC.  Then on Friday PM late or 
Saturday early AM, I go back to Philly.  The turnpike had several
booths saddled across the entire TP lanes and we all had to slow down (spit out more pollution), scramble to search and steer our tons of steel to get to the smallest queue, stop and idle the engines to pay the tolls (more spitting of gas), then accelerate the tons of steel to speeds (more spitting gas).  Then a few more miles later, repeat the same spit stop pollution (unburned gas) maneuvers to pay more $$.
and so on till the destination is reached.  We don't want the same
here in LA.  We don't want to turn our 'free'ways into 'pollute n' pay ways' as the East Coast TPs.  Not only to pay at the toll booths
but pretty soon, our Mr. Ridley-Thomas would propose and vote
themselves to have not only pay at the entrances as now but to give contracts to construct those super toll booths inside the 'Freeway' as well, say every 5 miles for all the lanes as in the East coast?  And why stop making
toll stops after the freeways?  Why not toll all the major county highways? Why not for all the state hwys?  How about why not for all the major streets in every town level, giving out contracts
for study then implementation against town citizens by our 5 counsel men?  The few, governing many again.

I won't like that few governing many case here about the toll or not decision.  This is another example
of republic structure result.  But definitely, it'll reduce one-person
occupying cars on our major streets and even our small local
streets.  If the county want more money, just raise the gas tax.
Don't need to spend billions for study and 'experimental' lane construction to test the public.  Not only $$ is needed for construction but also need to pay the poll takers salaries, benefits, and pay the union bosses?  Forget that.  Just let the citizens pump 
the gas themselves (no union boss pay off or salaries needed to do 
this) and have him pay the $$ (tax)?  $35/gal tax => $40/gal of 
gas if the supervisor's intention is to reduce the congestion on the fwys.  That is a disguise for raking up more $$ at the vital resources from citizens.