As long as the core developers headed by Gavin are true to the
founding credo of the Bitcoin, without profit thought on their
decision making, the core would work.  Not acting like our nations
 Fed Reserve and 535 legislators (House n' Senate staff) fed by 
corporate money.  Protect at all cost by Capitalist takeover of the
core.  Oligarchy however must be constantly be monitored by
the many citizens with power to vote and bring down if nec. Have 
the oligarchs accountable (punished and rewarded in a way not corruptible).

Alternatively, unlike back in 500BC Greece, we do have the means 
to implement Democracy.  We do have intelligent mass communicating instantly with ea. other.  We don't need like the Greeks to walk to the high mountain (Mt. Olympus?) meeting
place, taking an entire day off work (only the privileged citizens
were able to participate back then).  An insignificant voter
can today just sit in her/his kitchen while eating and vote directly.
We have the powerful instrument that is available for all of the mass citizens:

o  Fully meshed and cheap internet

o  Cheap PC (well, should be $20 on one potato chip inside
    a $5 keyboard-mouse with built in LCD screen)

The fully meshed network doesn't mean just wires and electromagnetic wave connections.  We have millions of servers
inside the cloud.  The servers and our billions of inputs from 'one-
CPU-one-vote' users.  The network can then 
process billions of votes/requests, calculate statistics as to what 
topics to be discussed to be the most important/popular,
and automatically be listed on billions of one-CPU screens .  It 
takes away our legislature function but with true Democratic way and much faster than 3 month - 3 yrs proposals setting on the legislator staffs desks.
And not corruptible as the legislator staffs.  This filtering was called
data reduction back when I was doing Satellite data processing software development.  Just syphone out the important data out of
billions of bytes streaming in to the ground station in real-time.  
Our not a few 'ground' stations but millions of these can do distibuted processing at higher speeds and higher capacities than
back in my satellite dayz.  No chaos on billion people requesting
millions of topics to be voted and same for the actual voting by these billions.

At all of my engineering work, we had excellent and moral Chief 
Engineers and excellent engineers under them to satisfy our 
stringent customers.  I believe the Bitcoin core is of
the same quality.  Customers in this case is of the mass.  Not for the few.  Human intelligence vs. artificial intelligence that we 
human ourselves creates?  Which is better?  Time to talk to
Hal in year 2001 Space Odyssey with power plug as necessary?
Not yet.  We haven't tried neither to full extent.