I don't see anything here that is not a mixture of physical facts and logical facts (that is, truths about causal events and truths about premise-conclusion links).  Physical computers within our universe may be neatly described by compact axioms.  Logic (in my not-uncommon view) deals with semantic implication: what is true in a model given that the axioms are true of it.  If you prove P!=NP using axioms that happen to apply to the computers of this universe then P!=NP for them as well, and the axioms will have been picked out to be applicable to real physics - a mixture of physical fact and logical fact.  I don't know where logical facts are stored or what they are, just as I don't yet know what makes the universe real, although I repose some confidence that the previous two questions are wrong - but so far I'm standing by my view that truths are about causal events, logical implications, or some mix of the two.

Axioms are that which mathematicians use to talk *about* integers instead of something else.  You could also take the perspective of trying to talk about groups of two pebbles as they exist in the real world, and wanting your axioms to correspond to their behavior.  But when you stop looking at the real world and close your eyes and try to do math, then in order to do math *about* something, like *about* the integers, *about* these abstract objects of thought that you abstracted away from the groups of pebbles, you need axioms that identify the integers in mathspace.  And having thus gained a subject of discourse, you can use the axioms to prove theorems that are *about* integers because the theorems hold wherever the axioms hold.  And if those axioms are true of physical reality from the appropriate standpoint, your conclusions will also hold of groups of pebbles.

&gt; Perhaps more to the point, do you agree that there is a coherent meta-ethical position that does deserve to be called moral realism, which asserts that moral and meta-moral computations are about something outside of individual humans or humanity as a whole (even if we're not sure how that works)?

That depends; is morality a subject matter that we need premises to identify in subjectspace, in order to talk *about* morality rather than something else, stored in that same mysterious place as 2 + 2 = 4 being true of *the* integers but needing axioms to talk about *the* integers in the first place?  Or are we talking about transcendent ineffable compelling stuff?  The first view is, I think, coherent; I should think so, it's my own.  The second view is not.