Comment reply 2 of 2.

Like,    
&gt;*LW straw man:* "OMG! You took advantage of a cheap syncretic symmetry between the perspectives of Thomism and computationalist singularitarianism in order to carve up reality using the words of the hated enemy, instead of sitting by while people who know basically *nothing* about philosophy assert that people who actually *do* know something about philosophy use the word 'soul' to designate something that's easy to contemptuously throw aside as transparently ridiculous! Despite your initial strong emphasis that your effort was very hasty and largely an attempt at having fun, I am still very skeptical of your mental health, let alone your rationality!     

&gt;*One-fourths-trolling variation on Will_Newsome:* "Aside from the very real importance of not setting a precedent or encouraging a norm of being contemptuous of things you don't understand, which we'll get back to... First of all, I was mostly just having fun, and second of all, more importantly, the sort of thing I did there is necessary for people to do if they want to figure out what people are *actually saying* instead of systematically misguidedly attributing their *own* inaccurate maps to some contemptible (non-existent) enemy of Reason. Seriously, you are flinching away from things because they're from the wrong literary genre, even though you've never actually tried to understand that literary genre. (By the way, I've actually *looked* at the ideas I'm talking about, and I don't have the conceptual allergies that keep you from actually trying to understand them on grounds of "epistemic hygiene", or in other words on grounds of assuming the conclusion of deserved contempt.) If someone took a few minutes to describe the same concepts in a language you had positive affect towards then you probably [wouldn't even bother](http://lesswrong.com/lw/ip/fake_explanations/) to be skeptical. But if I cipher-substitute the *actually quite equivalent* ideas thought up by the contemptible enemy then those same ideas become unmotivated insanity, obviously originally dreamed up because of some dozens of cognitive biases. (By the way, "genetic fallacy"; by the way, "try not to criticize people when they're right".) And besides charity and curiosity being fundamental virtue-skills in themselves, they're also necessary if one is to accurately model any complex phenomenon/concept/thing/perspective at all.    

&gt;*LW straw man:* "What is this nonsense? You are trying to tell us that, 'it is virtuous to engage in lots of  purposeful misinterpretation of lots of different models originally constructed by various people who you for some probably-motivatedly-misguided reason already suspect are generally unreasonable, even at the cost of building a primary maximally precise model, assuming for some probably-motivatedly-misguided reason that those two are necessarily at odds'. Or perhaps you are saying, 'it is generally virtuous to naively pattern match concepts from unfamiliar models to the nearest concept that you can easily imagine from a model you already have'. Or maybe, 'hasty piecemeal misinterpretations of mainstream Christianity and similar popular religions are a good source of useful ideas', or 'all you have to do is lower your epistemic standards and someday you might even become as clever as me', or 'just be stupid'. But that's horrible advice. You are clearly wrong, and thus I am justified in condescendingly admonishing you and guessing that you are yet another sympathizer of the contemptible enemies of Reason. (By the way aren't those hated enemies of Reason so contemptible? Haha! So contemptible! Om nom nom signalling nom contempt nom nom "rationality" nom.)    

&gt;*One-thirds-trolling variation on Will_Newsome:* "...So, ignoring the extended mutual epistemic back-patting session... I am seriously warning you: it is important that you become very skillful---fast, thorough, reflective, self-sharpening---at finding or building various decently-motivated-if-imperfect models of the same process/concept/thing so as to form a constellation of useful perspectives on different facets of it, and different ways of carving its joints, and why different facets/carvings might seem differentially important to various people or groups of people in different memetic or psychological contexts, et cetera. Once you have built this and a few other essential skills of sanity, *that* is when you can be contemptuous of any meme you happen upon that hasn't already been stamped with your subculture's approval. Until then you are simply reveling in your ignorance while sipping poison. Self-satisfied insanity is the *default*, for you or for any other human who doesn't quite understand that real-life rationality is a set of *skills*, not just a few tricks or a game or a banner or a type of magic used by Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres. Like any other human, you use your cleverness to systematically ignore the territory rather than try to understand it. Like any other human, you cheer for your side rather than notice confusion.  Like any other human, you self-righteously stand on a mountain of cached judgments rather than use curiosity to see anything anew. Have fun with that, humans. But don't say I didn't warn you."

By the way aren't those hated enemies of Reason so contemptible? Haha! So contemptible! Om nom nom signalling nom contempt nom nom "rationality" nom.