Wei_Dai:
&gt; Why do you find it beneficial to bring up implications about political and other charged issues, when discussing topics that are on LW's discussion agenda?

I don't think one should bring up such implications just for the hell of it, when they contribute nothing of substance. I also agree that among otherwise equally useful examples, one should use those that are least distracting and that minimize the danger of dissension. There's a simple cost-benefit case there, which I don't dispute. However, it seems to me that many relevant topics are impossible to discuss without bringing up such implications. 

Take for example my original post that started this discussion. For anyone who strives to be less wrong about almost anything, one of the absolutely crucial questions is what confidence should be assigned to what the academic mainstream says, and in this regard, I consider the topic of the post extremely relevant for LW. (If you believe otherwise, I would be curious to see the argument why -- and note that what I'm arguing now is independent of what you might think about the quality of its content.) Now, I think nobody could dispute that on many topics the academic opinion is biased to some extent due to political and ideological influences, so it's important to be able to recognize and evaluate such situations. Moreover, as far as I see, this represents a peculiar class of bias that cannot be adequately illustrated and discussed without bringing up some concrete examples of biases due to ideological or political influences. So, how could one possibly approach this issue while strictly avoiding the mention of anything that's ideologically charged at least by implication? 

Yet some people apparently believe that this line of inquiry already goes too far towards dangerous and undesirable topics. If this belief is correct, in the sense that maintaining a high quality of discourse really demands such a severe restriction on permissible topics, then this, in my opinion, decisively defeats the idea of having a forum like LW, under any reasonable interpretation of its mission statement, vague as it is. It effectively implies that people are inherently incapable of rational discourse unless it's stringently disciplined and focused on a narrow range of topics, the way expert technical forums are. Because this is definitely not the only example of how charged issues will inevitably be arrived upon by people discussing the general problems of sorting out truth from bias and nonsense. 

There are also other important points here, on which I've already elaborated in my other comments, which all stem from the same fundamental observation, namely that those topics where one needs an extraordinary level of rationality to escape bias and delusion and often exactly those that are commonly a matter of impassioned and polarized opinion. In other words, general skills in rational thinking and overcoming bias are of little use if one will stick to technical topics in which experts already have sophisticated, so to say, application-specific techniques for eliminating bias and nonsense. (Which often work well -- one can easily think of brilliant scientists and technical experts with outright delusional opinions outside of their narrow specialties -- and when they don't, the issue may well be impossible to analyze correctly without getting into charged topics.) But even if you disagree with my view expressed in this last paragraph, I think your question is adequately answered by the points I made before that. 
