&gt;So far as I can tell, the most likely reason we wouldn't get Friendly AI is the total serial research depth required to develop and implement a strong-enough theory of stable self-improvement with a possible side order of failing to solve the goal transfer problem.  

I'm curious that you seem to think the former problem is harder or less likely to be solved than the latter. I've been thinking the opposite, and one reason is that the latter problem seems more philosophical and the former more technical, and humanity seems to have a lot of technical talent that we can eventually recruit to do FAI research, but much less untapped philosophical talent. 

Also as another side note, I don't think we should be focusing purely on the "we come up with a value-stable architecture and then the FAI will make a billion self-modifications within the same general architecture" scenario. Another possibility might be that we don't solve the stable self-improvement problem at all, but instead solve the value transfer problem in a general enough way that the FAI we build immediately creates an entirely new architecture for the next generation FAI and transfer its values to its creation using our solution, and this happens just a few times. (The FAI doesn't try to make a billion self-modifications to itself because, just like us, it knows that it doesn't know how to safely do that.) (Cousin_it make a similar comment [earlier](http://lesswrong.com/lw/hmt/tiling_agents_for_selfmodifying_ai_opfai_2/949n).)

In all I can see three arguments for prioritizing the value transfer problem over the stable self-improvement problem: 1) the former seems harder so we need to get started on it earlier; 2) we know the former definitely needs to be solved whereas the latter may not need to be; 3) the former involves work that's less useful for building UFAI.

(On the main topic of the post, I've been assuming, without having put too much thought into it, that slower economic growth is good for eventually getting FAI. Now after reading the discussions here and on Facebook I realize that I haven't put enough thought into it and perhaps should be less certain about it than I was.)