&gt; It's the latter.

I'm glad to hear this, I much prefer it to David's interpretation. 

&gt; Can you explain more?

Perhaps, but it would be unwise. I have done far more explaining than is optimal already and my model of observed social behavior in this context is not one that predicts reason to change minds. ie. In a context where [this kind of disengenuity](http://lesswrong.com/lw/9c/mandatory_secret_identities/7jfn) is above -3 supplying reasons would be an error similar in kind to bringing a knife to a gun fight.

Note that this isn't to say *you* are too mind killed to communicate with, rather it is to say that systematic voting and replying based on already intrenched political affiliations would overwhelm any signal regarding the actual subject matter, leaving you an inaccurate perception of how the subject matter is perceived in general.

&gt; I get the feeling from this that you don't like rhetorical questions, but I'm not sure if that's the case, or if it is, why.

I don't mind them, they are appropriate from time to time. I am aware, however, that they are often given privileged status such that answering them directly in a way that doesn't support the implied argument is sometimes considered 'missing the point' rather than rejecting it. Rhetorical questions are a powerful dark arts technique and don't need additional support and encouragement when they fail.

&gt; Do you prefer that I had phrased my comment like the following? (Or let me know if I should just wait for your post to explain this.)

Absolutely. Or, rather, if you had believed as David did that the answer to the question was pretty damn obviously "No" then your original comment would be a far more personal act of aggression than this one would have been. But I don't think this is because it was a rhetorical question but rather because it would be a form that is more personal, presumptive, condescending and disingenuous. The only general problem with 'rhetorical questions' that would be pertinent is that they are often just as socially effective at supporting [bullshit](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/On_Bullshit) as supporting coherent positions. (The 'bullshit' here refers to the countefactually-known-to-be-false assumption that I would agree with you if I reflected. It does not apply if either you were sincerely in doubt or you used the revised argument form).