&gt; "thou art godshatter" argument ... We no longer seem to have such an argument (that is still viable) 

How about this restatement (focus), I think you agreed previously, and your response was more subtle that denying it. IIRC, you said that complex aspects of value are present, but possibly of low importance, so if we have no choice (time), we should just go the simple way, while still capturing nontrivial amount of value. This is different from saying that value could be actually simple.

There are many possible values, and we could construct agents that optimize any one of them. Among these many values only few are simple in abstract (i.e. not referring to artifacts in the world) and explicit form. What kind of agents are human, which of the many possible values are associated with them in a sufficiently general sense of value-association that applies to humans? For humans to have specifically those few-of-many simple values, they would need to be constructed in a clean way with an explicit goal architecture that places those particular abstract goals in charge. But humans are not like that, they have a lot of accidental complexity in every joint, so there is no reason to expect them to implement that particular simple goal system.

This is an antiprediction, it argues from a priori improbability, rather than tries to shift an existing position that favors simple values. At this point, it intuitively feels to me that simple values are unprivileged, and there seems to be no known reason to expect that they would be more likely than anything else (that has more data). This kind of simplicity is not the kind from Occam's razor: it seems like expecting air molecules in the room to keep in one corner, arranged on a regular grid, as opposed to being distributed in a macroscopically more uniform, but microscopically enormously detailed configuration. We have this brain-artifact that is known to hold lots of data, and expecting all this data to amount to a simple summary doesn't look plausible to me.