&gt; I don't know how to explain "actual meaning", but it seems intuitively obvious to me that the actual meaning of "murder is wrong" is not "murder is forbidden by Yahweh", even if the speaker of the sentence believes that murder is wrong because murder is forbidden by Yahweh.

That doesn't seem intuitively obvious to me, which illustrates one reason why I prefer to taboo terms rather than bash my intuitions against the intuitions of others in an endless game of intuitionist conceptual analysis. :)

Perhaps the most common 'foundational' family of theories of meaning in linguistics and philosophy of language belong to the [mentalist](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/meaning/#MenThe) program, according to which semantic content is determined by the mental contents of the speaker, not by an abstract analysis of symbol forms taken out of context from their speaker. One straightforward application of a mentalist approach to meaning would conclude that if the speaker was assuming (or mentally representing) a judgment of moral wrongness in the sense of forbidden-by-God, then the meaning of the speaker's sentence refers in part to the demands of an imagined deity.

&gt; But the way we actually resolved the debate about 'sound' is by reaching the understanding that there are two distinct concepts (acoustic vibrations and auditory experience) that are related in a certain way and also happen to share the same signifier. If, prior to reaching this understanding, you ask people to stipulate a definition for 'sound' when they use it, they will give you confused answers. I think saying "let's resolve confusions in metaethics by asking people to stipulating definitions for 'morally good'", before we reach a similar level of understanding regarding morality, is to likewise put the cart before the horse.

But "reaching this understanding" with regard to morality was precisely the goal of 'Conceptual Analysis and Moral Theory' and 'Pluralistic Moral Reductionism.' I repeatedly made the point that people regularly use a narrow family of signifiers ('morally good', 'morally right', etc.) to call out a wide range of distinct concepts (divine attitudes, consequentialist predictions, deontological judgments, etc.), and that this leads to exactly the kind of confusion encountered by two people who are both using the signifier 'sound' to call upon two distinct concepts (acoustic vibrations and auditory experience).