One problem with this is that you often can't access the actual epistemic standards of other people because they have no incentives to reveal them to you. Consider the case of the Blu-ray copy protection system [BD+](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BD%2B) (which is fresh in my mind because I just used it recently as a example elsewhere). I'm not personally involved with this case, but my understanding based on what I've read is that the Blu-ray consortium bought the rights to the system from a reputable cryptography consulting firm for several million dollars (presumably after checking with other independent consultants), and many studios choose Blu-ray over HD DVD because of it. (From Wikipedia: Several studios cited Blu-ray Disc's adoption of the BD+ anti-copying system as the reason they supported Blu-ray Disc over HD DVD. The copy protection scheme was to take "10 years" to crack, according to Richard Doherty, an analyst with Envisioneering Group.) And yet one month after Blu-ray discs were released using the system, it was broken and those discs became copyable to people having a commercially available piece of software.

I think the actual majority opinion in the professional cryptography community, when they talk about this privately among themselves, was that such copy protection systems are pretty hopeless (i.e., likely to be easily broken to people with the right skills), but the elite decision makers had no access to this information. The consultants they bought the system from had no reason to tell them this, or were just overconfident in their own ideas. The other consultants they checked with couldn't personally break the system, probably due to not having quite the right sub-specialization (which perhaps only a handful of people in the world had), and since it would have been embarrassing to say "this is probably easily broken, but I can't break it", they just stuck with "I can't break it". (Or again, they may have been overconfident and translated "I can't break it" to "it can't be broken", even if they previously agreed with the majority opinion before personally studying the system.)

In order to correct for things like this, you have to take the elite opinion that you have access to, and use as evidence to update some other prior, instead of using it directly *as* a prior. In other words, ask questions like "If BD+ was likely to be easily breakable to people with the right skills, would I learn this from these consultants?" (But of course doing that exposes you to your own biases which perhaps make elite opinion too easy to "explain away".)