I'm not entirely sure if it's alright to alter someone's mind to update in light of new evidence if they didn't *want* to update. The same goes for the 1 and 3.

But let's assume, for the sake of argument, that we accept your categorization. Or let's at least assume that the person in question doesn't mind the updating. It seems to me that there are two possible kinds of knowledge about what wireheading feels like, and we must distinguish between which one we mean.

The first kind is abstract, declarative knowledge. This may affect our (instrumental?) preferences, depending on our existing preferences. For instance, I know that people choosing where to live underestimate the effect travel times have on their happiness and overestimate the effect that the amount of space has on their happiness. Knowing this, and preferring to be happy, I might choose a different home than I otherwise would have. I presume you don't mean this kind of knowledge, as we *already* know in the abstract that wireheading would be the best feeling we could ever possibly experience.

The second kind is a more visceral, experienced kind of knowledge, the knowledge of what it *really feels* like. Knowing what it feels like to be a bat, to use Nagel's classic example. Here it becomes tricky. It's an open question to what degree you can really add this kind of a knowledge to someone's mind, as the recollection of the experience is necessarily incomplete. We might remember being happy or wireheaded, but just the act of recalling it doesn't return us to a state of mind where we are just as happy as we were back then. Instead we have an abstract memory of having been happy, which possibly activates other emotions on our mind, depending on what sorts of associations have built up around the memory. We might feel an uplifting echo of that happiness, a longing to experience it again, bitterness or sorrow about being unable to relive it, or just a blank indifference.

If an FAI simply simulates a state of mind where knowledge of the experience of wireheadedness has been added, I don't think that will change the person's preferences at all. The recollection of the wirehead state has just became an abstractly recalled piece of knowledge, without any emotional or motivational triggers that would affect one's preferences in any way.