This seems like a trivial idea, interesting mostly insofar as it dispels unnecessary mysteriousness of physical world, but not particularly meaningful or helpful otherwise. I'll try to summarize the context in which the idea of mathematical universe looks to me this way.

When abstract objects or ideas are thought about with mathematical precision, it turns out that they are best described by their "structure", which is a collection of properties that these things have (like commutativity of multiplication on a complex plane or connectedness of a sphere), rather than some kind of "reductionistic" recipe for assembling them. These properties imply other properties, and in many interesting cases, even based on a fixed initial definition it's possible to explore them in many possible ways, there is no restriction to a single direction in finding more properties (like new laws of number theory or geometry, as opposed to running a computer program to completion). At the same time, it's not possible, either in principle or in practice, to infer all interesting properties following from given defining properties that specify a sufficiently complicated structure, so there is perpetual logical uncertainty.

When two structures (or two "things" having these respective structures, described by them to some extent) share some of their properties in some sense, it's possible to infer new facts about one of the structures by observing the other. This way, for example, a computer program can reason about an infinite structure: if we know that a certain property stands or falls for the program and for the structure together, we can conclude that the property holds for the structure if its counterpart does for the program and so on. Also, setting up a structure that reflects properties of another one doesn't require knowing all defining properties of that structure, knowing only sufficiently accurate approximations to some of them may be sufficient to make useful inferences.

Physical world then can be seen as just another thing that, to the extent it can be rigorously thought about, is described by certain properties or principles, of which we know only some and not precisely. Thinking about the world involves setting up certain things (brains, computers, experimental apparatus, abstract structures, physical theories, etc.) that capture some of its structure (these act as "maps" of the world), and then inferring more properties (making "predictions") based on what they've managed to capture.

It doesn't seem like there is much more to say on this big picture level, and treating physical world the same way we treat other complicated things, such as sufficiently complicated mathematical structures, seems like a natural thing to do. Of course, the physical world is very special, it is this particular thing with these particular properties, and we happen to have evolved and live in it, but that doesn't seem fundamentally different from how the complex plane is another particular thing with its own properties. Also, like "physical" is not a meaningful distinction in the sense that it doesn't say anything specific about properties of the world, also "mathematical structure" is not a meaningful distinction in the same sense, and so insisting that the physical world "is a mathematical structure" doesn't seem meaningful. The physical world has structure, just as arithmetic has structure, but it doesn't seem like much more can be said on this level of description.