Sorry for being confusing, and thanks for giving me a chance to try again! (I did write that comment too quickly due to lack of time.)

So, my point is, I think that there is very little reason to think that evolution somehow had to solve the Löbstacle in order to produce humans. We run into the Löbstacle when we try to use the standard foundations of mathematics (first-order logic + PA or ZFC) in the obvious way to make a self-modifying agent that will continue to follow a given goal after having gone through a very large number of self-modifications. We don't currently have any framework not subject to this problem, and we need one if we want to build a Friendly seed AI. Evolution didn't have to solve this problem. It's true that evolution did have to solve the planning/self-prediction problem, but it didn't have to solve it with extremely high reliability. I see very little reason to think that if we understood how evolution solved the problem it solved, we would then be really close to having a satisfactory Löbstacle-free decision theory to use in a Friendly seed AI -- and thus, conversely, I see little reason to think that an AGI project must solve the Löbstacle in order to solve the planning/prediction problem as well as evolution did.

I can more easily conceive of the possibility (but I think it rather unlikely, too) that solving the Löbstacle is fundamentally necessary to build an agent that can go through millions of rewrites without running out of steam: perhaps without solving the Löbstacle, each rewrite step will have an independent probability of making the machine wirehead (for example), so an AGI doing no better than evolution will almost certainly wirehead during an intelligence explosion. But in this scenario, since evolution build us, an AGI project might build an AI that solves the planning/self-prediction as well as we do, and *that AI* might then go and solve the Löbstacle and go through a billion self-modifications and take over the world. (The human operators might intervene and un-wirehead it every 50,000 rewrites or so until it's figured out a solution to the Löbstacle, for example.) So even in this scenario, the Löbstacle doesn't seem a barrier to AI capability to me; but it is a barrier to FAI, because if it's the AI that eventually solves the Löbstacle, the superintelligence down the line will have the values of the AI at the time it's solved the problem. This was what I intended to say by saying that the AGI would "successfully navigate an intelligence explosion -- and then paperclip the universe".

(On the other hand, while I only think of the above as an outside possibility, I think there's more than an outside possibility that a clean reflective decision theory could be helpful for an AGI project, even if I don't think it's a necessary prerequisite. So I'm not *entirely* unsympathetic to your concerns.)

Does the above help to clarify the argument I had in mind?