Thanks for doing this! (I don't think these are properly called "[meditations](http://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Meditation)", though: "Research shows that you're much more likely to remember useful info if you try to solve the problem yourself before reading the solution. Succeed or fail, the important thing is to have tried first." I think in this case, the primary point isn't to remember the correct answer once you post it, but to see how far off our own were, to correct our confidence in our understanding of QM.)

Okay, I do not place much confidence in any of the following, and to do it properly I'd probably have to spend far more time on this than I can spare, but I guess it's still useful to find out *how* wrong I'll be...

My mental image is the following stark simplification: I think of the state at any point in time as two probability distributions in 2D space (2D = the S-G apparatus viewed from the side, with the atom moving left-to-right and being deflected up/down), one probability distribution for the position of the atom if it's aligned along the field, one for if it's aligned against the field. I'm imagining each distribution to be concentrated around a single point at any point in time, but not necessarily the same point for both distributions. By "probability distribution" I do not mean that I'm actually doing measurements that have a certain probability to come out one way or another (though I guess I could), I just mean that I only look at the squared amplitude of the wave function, forgetting about the phase, which I'm guessing is not relevant to the problem (one place where I might be wrong). Before the atom enters the S-G apparatus, the two distributions are the same. I'm guessing that what the magnetic field does is, it makes the center of one distribution move up and the center of the other move down; again, this is a place where I might be going wrong, but my reasoning is that this is what seems to be required to get the right behavior if I put in an atom that is *definitely* aligned along/against the field.

M1: My intuitive way of thinking about it is that the atom aligns itself when the centers of the two distributions start moving apart, i.e., in the apparatus. But this is not what you're talking about. For the MWI "world" to split, we need entanglement with something big, which happens when the atom hits the screen. Therefore, in the Copenhagen picture, hitting the screen is when the measurement happens.

M2: I assume the probability distributions are very concentrated, and the holes are big enough to let practically all of the "probability mass" through, so that the shape of the distribution looks the same after passing the holes, and continue to move in a straight line (unlike in the double-slit experiment, where after passing the slit, the particle seems to move in all directions from the slit). Then, the reverse magnetic field will make the two blobs come together again, and the atoms are "unaligned" (= aligned in whatever direction each of them was when it entered the apparatus ... no wait, I guess atoms aren't spin-1/2 and I can't think of their state as being given by an alignment in a particular direction -- I think...; but anyway: I think they are again in whatever spin state they were before entering the apparatus).

M3: "Two equally bright blobs corresponding to aligned and anti-aligned atoms respectively", because my two blobs of probability will just move through the holes undisturbed and then hit the second screen just as if the first hadn't been there.

M4: Alright, this makes me question whether the mental model I've been using can be correct, because I've assumed that no entanglement with the apparatus happens, but I guess for the action of the apparatus on the atom there probably has to be an equal and opposite reaction of the atom on the apparatus, of some form... and I'm *not* sure how to think of that in the context of quantum mechanics. I can't do this one, and wonder whether my answers to the others are wrong because of this.

I hope you'll post a solution set at some point?