I haven't seen the linked "The Institutes for the Achievement of Human Potential" mentioned in the book, neither a discussion whether gifted children are healthier or not, so... please, let's focus on Polgár instead of including him in a large set and then debating other examples of that set instead.

I agree with you that dismissing IQ as irrelevant (or: irrelevant as long as the child is not retarded) is wrong. I suspect Polgár may live in a bubble where high intelligence is so overrepresented that he takes it for granted. (Essentially, I interpret this book as "assuming you already have a high-IQ child, this is what you should do"; which is *not* how he meant it.) However...

&gt; Let kids play? Homeschool them? Try to find a hobby early on (or just force them to learn the violin or piano...)? Use shorter 30 minute lessons? Play simplified versions first? Wow, surely no one has ever tried those - if only more people would, we would surely discover genius all over the place!

Uhm, let's start with the obvious: most people in developed countries *don't* homeschool their children.

Then, just look at the contradiction in what you wrote "let kids *play*... or just *force* them to learn the violin or piano". So, which one is it going to be? Because I know many people who let kids play, but that typically means sending them to a playground, letting them watch TV, letting them play first-person shooters, or letting them browse Facebook all day. That's not what Polgár says. And there are also a few people who force their kids to play piano lessons (there was this abusive "tiger mother" popular in the media a few years ago), but I am sure the kids would not describe it as being let play. So this is also not what Polgár says. What he says is to find something useful (well, assuming charitably that being a chess master is useful in some sense), and turn the first steps on the learning curve into a game. And then let kids play... along the learning curve... until they experience success and related social rewards, and then the motivational feedback loop is established.

I believe that most people fail at this step. (And so does the school system.) Because they push it too much, or because they give up too easily. Because they don't even know where the learning curve starts, either because they are too far themselves and never thought about this from teacher's point of view, or because they actually don't have deep knowledge themselves, and it's more about "teachers' passwords" and "applause lights" for them. In general, education is one of those areas where everyone goes full Dunning–Kruger, because everyone was at school once, so everyone feels like an expert. But I believe that at least 9 out of 10 people trying to teach their children chess would *not* start by playing dozens of games with kings and pawns only, but instead would try to explain how all chess pieces move at the same time, because that's how people around me do teaching all the time, including many teachers.

Doing this properly is a lot of work. You must think strategically to make a plan; instead of e.g. waiting passively until your child will spontaneously manifest a superior skill. And then you must spend hundreds of hours executing the plan, because learning is about repetition. And you must be good enough, both at teaching in general, and in the thing you want to teach specifically, for that plan to make sense. The first lessons you must give yourself; then you have to buy books, hire trainers, travel with kids to tournaments, etc. Even people smart enough to do this may be too lazy; or just too busy doing something else.