&gt; Yes, I'm pretty sure, although I leave open the possibility that I may encounter an argument in the future that would persuade me to change my mind. My understanding is that most people have preferences like mine, so I'm surprised that you're so surprised.

I'm shocked, and I hadn't thought that most people had preferences like yours - at least would not verbally express such preferences; their "real" preferences being a whole separate moral issue beyond that.  I would have thought that it would be mainly psychopaths, the Rand-damaged, and a few unfortunate moral philosophers with mistaken metaethics, who would decline *that* offer.

I guess I would follow up with these questions:  (1)  When you see someone else hurting, or attend a friend's funeral, do you feel sad; (2) are you more viscerally afraid of your own death than the strength of that emotion, if comparing two single cases; (3) do you decline to multiply out of a deliberate belief that all events after your own death ought to have zero utility to you, even if they feel sad when you think about them now; or (4) do you just generally want to leave the intuitive judgment (2) with its innate lack of multiplication undisturbed?

Or if I'm asking the wrong questions here, then what *is* going on?  I would expect most humans to instinctively feel that their whole tribe, to say nothing of the entire rest of reality, was worth something; and I would expect a rationalist to understand that if their own life does not literally have lexicographic priority (i.e., lives of others have infinitesimal=0 value in the utility function) then the multiplication factor here is overwhelming; and I would also expect you, Wei Dai, to not mistakenly believe that you were *rationally forced* to be lexicographically selfish regardless of your feelings... so I'm really not clear on what could be going on here.

I guess my most important question would be:  Do you *feel* that way, or are you *deciding* that way?  In the former case, I might just need to make a movie showing one individual after another being healed, and after you'd seen enough of them, you would agree - the visceral emotional force having become great enough.  In the latter case I'm not sure what's going on.

PS again:  Would you accept a 60% probability of death in exchange for healing the rest of reality?