In the scenario where the coin lands tails, nothing interesting happens, and the coin is logically independent of anything else, so let us assume that the coin lands heads. We are assuming (correct me if I'm wrong) that Omega is a perfect predictor. So, in the second scenario, we *already know* that the person will press the button even before he makes his decision, even before he does it, or else either a). Omega's prediction is wrong (contradiction) or b). the Earth was destroyed a million years ago (contradiction). The fact that we currently exist gives us information about what people will do in the future, because what people will do in the future is perfectly tied to whether we were destroyed in the past through the logical device of Omega. Hence, in the second scenario, there's not even a "choice", because the outcome is known to us ahead of time. The Universe, including "choices", is deterministic, but we do not call something a "choice" when the outcome is known with complete certainty ahead of time.

I think that, because we have no experience with _actual psychics_, most of us have no idea what it _feels like_ to have something that's normally a "choice" be pre-determined. If an actual, perfect predictor says that you are the Chosen One, it *doesn't matter* whether you go on a heroic quest, or lay in bed and read magazines all day, because you're going to wind up saving the Universe regardless. If you are a heroic individual, and a perfect predictor says that you will go on a dangerous quest, either a). there must be zero probability of you *deciding* to stay home and read magazines, which is fantastically unlikely because zero is a small number and dangerous quests are difficult, or b). you staying at home and reading magazines won't affect the outcome. How many heroes whose salvation of the universe was prophesied in advance carried out that logic?

"But since copies of us occur more frequently in universes with late filters than in universes with early filters, such a decision (which Robin arrives at via SIA) can be justified on utilitarian grounds under UDT."

Doesn't this contradict the title of the post? If I understand correctly, you're saying, in agreement with Robin, that we should put work into preventing late filters. But anything that you want to put work into preventing is, ipso facto, bad news.