Consider two players as two concurrent processes: each can make any of three decisions. If you consider their decisions separately, it's total of 9 options, and the state space that you construct to analyze them will contain 9 elements. Reasoning with uncertainty can then consider events on this state space, and preference is free to define prior+utility for the 9 elements in any way.

But consider another way of treating this situation: instead of 9 elements in the state space, let's introduce only 6: 3 for the first player's decision and 3 for the second player's. Now, the joint decision of our players is represented not by one element of the state space as in the first case, but by a pair of elements, one from each triple. The options for choosing prior+utility, and hence preference, are more limited for this state space.

In the first case, it's unclear what could the probability of being one of the players mean: each element of the state space corresponds to both players. In the second case, it's easy: just take the total measure of each triple.

When the decisions are dependent, the second way of treating this situation can fail, and the expressive power of expected utility become insufficient to express resulting preference. 

There is an interesting extension to the question of whether indexical probability is always meaningful: is the probability of ordinary observations, even in a deterministic world, meaningful? I'm not sure it is. When you solve the decision problem, you consider preference over *strategies*, and a strategy includes the instructions for what to do given either observation. In the space of all possible strategies, each point considers all branches at each potential observation, just like in the example with triples of decisions above, where all 9 elements of the state space describe the decisions of both players. There doesn't seem to be a natural way to define probability of each of the possible observations at a given observation point, starting from a distribution representing preference over possible strategies.