I think you're looking at later stages of development than I am. By the time Turing came around the thousands-year-long effort to formalize computation was mostly over; single models get way too much credit because they herald the triumph at the end of the war. It took many thousands of years to get to the point of Church/Goedel/Turing. I think that regarding justification we haven't even had our Leibniz yet. If you look at Leibniz's work he combined philosophy (monadology), engineering (expanding on Pascal's calculators), cognitive science (alphabet of thought), and symbolic logic, all centered around computation though at that time there was no such thing as 'computation' as we know it (and now we know it so well that we can use it to listen to music or play chess). Archimedes is a much earlier example but he was less focused. If you look at Darwin he spent the majority of his time as a very good naturalist, paying close attention to lots of details. His model of evolution came later. 

With morality we happen to be up quite a few levels of abstraction where 'looking at lots of details' involves paying close attention to themes from evolutionary game theory, microeconomics, theoretical computer science &amp;c. Look at CFAI to see Eliezer drawing on evolution and evolutionary psychology to establish an extremely straightforward view of 'justification', e.g. "Story of a Blob". It's easy to stumble around in a haze and fall off a cliff if you don't have a ton of models like that and more importantly a very good sense of the ways in which they're unsatisfactory.

Those reasons aren't convincing by themselves of course. It'd be nice to have a list of big abstract ideas whose formulation we can study on both the individual and memetic levels. E.g. natural selection and computation, and somewhat smaller less-obviously-analogous ones like general relativity, temperature (there's a book about its invention), or economics. Unfortunately there's a lot of success story selection effects and even looking closely might not be enough to get accurate info. People don't really have introspective access to how they generate ideas.

Side question: how long do you think it would've taken the duo of Leibniz and Pascal to discover algorithmic probability theory if they'd been roommates for eternity?

&gt;If so, what do you base your claim on (besides your intuition)?

I think my previous paragraph answered this with representative reasons. This is sort of an odd way to ask the question 'cuz it's mixing levels of abstraction. Intuition is something you get after looking at a lot of history or practicing a skill for awhile or whatever. There are a lot of chess puzzles I can solve just using my intuition, but I wouldn't have those intuitions unless I'd spent some time on the object level practicing my tactics. So "besides your intuition" means like "and please give a fine-grained answer" and not literally "besides your intuition". Anyway, yeah, personal experience plus history of science. I think you can see it in Nesov's comments from back when, e.g. his looking at things like game semantics and abstract interpretation as sources of inspiration. 