(sigh) OK, my two cents.

I honestly lost track of what you and wedrifid were arguing about way back when. It had something to do with whether "fictional" was a useful response to someone asking about how to categorize characters like the Joker when it comes to the specifics of their psychological quirks, IIRC, although I may be mistaking the salient disagreement for some other earlier disagreement (or perhaps a later one).

Somewhere along the line I got the impression that you believe wedrifid's behavior drags down the general quality of discourse on the site (either on net, or relative to some level of positive contribution you think he would be capable of if he changed his behavior, I'm not sure which) by placing an undue emphasis on describing on-site social patterns in game-theoretical terms. I agree that wedrifid consistently does this but I don't consider it a negative thing, personally. 

[EDIT: To clarify, I agree that wedrifid consistently describes on-site social patterns in game-theoretical terms; I don't agree with "undue emphasis"]

I _do_ think he's more abrupt and sometimes rude (in conventional social terms) in his treatment of some folks on this site than I'd prefer, and that a little more consistent kindness would make me more comfortable. Then again, I think the same thing of a lot of people, including most noticeably Eliezer; if the concern is that he's acting as some kind of poor role model in so doing, I think that ship sailed with or without wedrifid.

I'm less clear on what wedrifid's objection to your behavior is, exactly, or how he thinks it damages the site. I do think that Vaniver's characterization of what his objection _is_ is more accurate than your earlier one was.

[EDIT: Reading [this comment](http://lesswrong.com/lw/9c/mandatory_secret_identities/7kko), it seems one of the things he objects to is you opposing his opposition to engaging with Dmitry. For my own part, I think engaging with Dmitry was a net negative for the site. Whether opposing opposition to Dmitry is _also_ a net negative, I don't really know, but it's certainly plausible.]


I realize this isn't really an answer to your question, but it's the mental model I've got, and since you seem rather insistent on getting some sort of input on this I figured I'd give you what I have. Feel free to ask followup questions if you like. (Or not.)