I can do that:

Morality is a specific set of values (Or, more precisely, a specific algorithm/dynamic for judging values). Humans happen to be (for various reasons) the sort of beings that value morality as opposed to valuing, say, maximizing paperclip production. It is indeed objectively better (by which we _really_ mean "more moral"/"the sort of thing we should do") to be moral than to be paperclipish. And indeed we _should_ be moral, where by "should" we mean, "more moral".

(And moral, when we actually cash out what we _actually mean_ by it seems to translate to a complicated blob of values like happiness, love, creativity, novelty, self determination, fairness, life (as in protecting theirof), etc...)

It may appear that paperclip beings and moral beings disagree about something, but not really. The paperclippers would, once they've analyzed what humans actually mean by "moral", would agree "yep, humans are more moral than us. But who cares about this morality stuff, it doesn't maximize paperclips!"

Of course, screw the desires of the paperclippers, after all, they're not actually moral. We really are objectively better (once we think carefully by what we _mean_ by "better") than them.

(note, "does something or does something not actually do a good job of fulfilling a certain value?" is an objective question. ie, "does a particular action tend to increase the expected number of paperclips?" (on the paperclipper side) or, on our side, stuff like "does a particular action tend to save more lives, increase happiness, increase fairness, add novelty..." etc etc etc is an objective question in that we can extract specific meaning from that question and can objectively (in a way the paperclippers would agree with) judge that. It simply happens to be that we're the sorts of beings that actually care about the answer to that (as we should be), while the screwy hypothetical paperclippers are immoral and only care about paperclips.

How's that, that make sense? Or, to summarize the summary, "Morality is objective, and we humans happen to be the sorts of beings that  value morality, as opposed to valuing something else instead"