&gt; I don't know of a strong argument that we should care about each part of the multiverse exactly according to a Solomonoff measure. To me, it currently only seems plausible in that role due to the absence of good alternatives.

One way to think about it is viewing each universe as existing in many instances "simulated" by different other processes/universes. Parts within the universe which can be "easily located" are the parts where more of these simulations are instantiated.

&gt; ...suppose the artifact always returns an answer within a fixed amount of time, never provably contradicts ZFC or itself, and also gives "reasonable" answers when ZFC doesn't say anything (e.g., it tends to return 0 for P when there is no proof in ZFC whether P halts or not, but P is implied not to halt by ZFC + other plausible axioms).

This would only make me assume that the artifact runs on a theory more powerful than ZFC, possibly a relatively simple theory that is more powerful than anything we can formulate.

&gt; Can you give an argument that we don't need "more universal" measures than Solomonoff's, even taking into account reasoning about logical uncertainty?

I don't think logical uncertainty is going to be a magic wand that makes Goedelian problems go away. I think logical uncertainty is going to be just a way to estimate hard computations with scarce resources. See also [my comment to Nate](http://lesswrong.com/lw/lgd/questions_of_reasoning_under_logical_uncertainty/bydu).

&gt; You could very well be right, but I'd need much stronger arguments than the ones I'm aware of before thinking it would be a good idea to build this into an FAI as a fundamental assumption (which the FAI may not be able to reason its way out of if it turns out to be wrong).

I understand your concern, but this is just one aspect of a wider problem. Human reasoning is not based on a well-defined set of formal assumptions. However, FAI (apparently) *will* be based on a well-defined set of formal assumptions. Therefore it seems inevitable that there will be some "information loss" when we "hand over control" to FAI. I don't know how to solve this except maybe finding a way to somehow directly fuse the messy foundations of human reasoning with a much more powerful engine of cognition. And I'm not sure whether the latter really makes sense and whether it's feasible even if it makes sense in theory.