I agree that thousandfold repetition is necessary to increase the speed and to make the process automatic enough that the student can now focus on the larger picture. Trying to teach understanding without repetition typically has the outcome that the student has a general idea about the whole process, but is unable to actually *do* it, because it is impossible to pay enough attention to all levels of complexity at the same time (calculation of 5+3 competes for attention with understanding of why are we adding this 5 and this 3 in the first place).

Thinking about myself at elementary school, the joy of being able to solve a problem would be (and actually was) enough motivation to solve 1000 single-digit additions. But I don't want to generalize from one example, and I am not opposed in principle to using gamification in such cases.

However, before gamification, I would make sure that the child understands precisely what is going on. (Just like in teaching physical movement, e.g. sport or martial art, you first want the student to do the movement *correctly*, and only afterwards to do it *quickly*. A correct but slow move can be made faster by repetition, but a mistake in an incorrect move will only get more fixed by repeating.)

So, in practice: Before moving to single-digit addition, I would make sure the child really understands the single-digit numbers *per se*. For example, it should be obvious to the child that five apples remain five apples regardless of whether you arrange them in a line or in a circle, or whether you count them left-to-right or right-to-left. (This can be achieved by e.g. playing stupid, asking the child to count the apples, then rearranging them, and asking the child to count them again. It should be the child who say that it doesn't matter, because the result will be the same.) Also, make sure the child can count to 10 flawlessly. (Alternatively, if the child can only count to e.g. 7 flawlessly, limit the lesson to addition of two numbers where the result is not more than 7.)

Now we can use objects (apples? pencils? toys?), and put 2 apples on the table, then put 3 apples on the table (next heap), then count all apples on the table. Repeat a few times. Then let the child make a prediction "if we put 2 apples and 3 apples, how many apples will it be together?" and verify the prediction experimentally. Celebrate the successful predictions! If you have multiple children, let all of them make predictions, and then one of them perform the experiment. (As an adult, you never comment on the predictions until the experiment is completed. This is how you teach the children that the answer is in the "territory", not [in teacher's head](https://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Guessing_the_teacher%27s_password). You also show them what to do if they later [forget something](http://lesswrong.com/lw/la/truly_part_of_you/).)

When the children are already good at this, make them discover the [commutativeness](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commutative_property) of addition by "accidentally" making them calculate "4+2" right after they calculated "2+4", etc. At some moment a child will notice "hey, it's the same". If this happens in a classroom, this is the moment when you let children debate the new discovery among themselves. Don't tell them whether the discovery is correct or not, but perhaps suggest to make a series of further experiments (let the kids suggest the pairs of numbers to try).

And only after all of this, let them play a computer game with automatic feedback and artificial rewards, to gain greater speed. But maybe the children will be already motivated enough that you can just give them a paper sheet with thousand problems (and then let them review each other's answers).

Experience suggests that using this method you progress a bit slowly at the beginning, but the knowledge is more solid, which allows you to save time later. (Less need to backtrack to the old lessons, when the child would e.g. fail at a more complex task because they actually made a mistake at the subproblem of addition.) Later this deeper understanding will pay off, e.g. you don't need to teach commutativeness of addition as a *separate fact* later; your children will understand the concept on gut level, even if they never heard the word "commutative".