&gt; The reason UDT is called "updateless" is that it doesn't eliminate or change weight of any of the possible worlds. You might want to re-read the UDT post to better understand it.

A particular instance of UDT running particular execution history got to condition on this execution history; you can say that you call conditioning what I call updates; in practice you will want not to run the computations irrelevant to the particular machine, and you will have strictly less computing power in the machine than in the universe it inhabits including the machine itself. It would be good if you could provide example of experimentations it might perform, somewhat formally derived. It feels to me that while it is valuable that you formalized some of the notions you largely have shifted/renamed all the actual problems.

E.g. it is problematic to specify utility function on reality, its incoherent. In your case the utility function is specified on all mathematically representable theories, which may well not allow to actually value a paperclip. Plus the number of potential paperclips within a theory would grow larger than any computable function of size of the theory, and the actions may well be dominated by relatively small, but absolutely enormous, differences between huge theories. Can you make actual example of some utility function? It doesn't have to correspond to paperclips - anything so that UDT with this plugged in would actually do something to our reality rather than the imaginary BusyBeaver(100) beings with imaginary dustspecks in their eyes which might be running a boxed sim of our world.

With regards to Ben Goertzel, where does his AGI include anything like this not so vague utility function of yours? The marketing spiel  in question is, indeed, that Ben Goertzel's AI (or someone else's) would maximize an utility function and kill everyone or something, which leads me to assume that they are not talking of your utility function.

With regards to neuromorphic AGIs, I think there's far too much science fiction and far too little understanding of neurology in the rationalization of 'why am I getting paid'. While I do not doubt that brain does implement some sort of 'master trick' in, perhaps, every cortical column, there is an elaborate system for motivating this whole, and that system quite thoroughly fails to care about the real world state, in deed. And once again, why do you think neuromorphic AGIs would have the sort of values of real world as per UDT?

edit: furthermore it seems fairly preposterous to assume high probability that your utility function will actually be implemented in a working manner - say, paperclip maximizing manner - by people who really need SI to tell them to beware of creating skynet. SI is the typical 'high level idea guys' with a belief that the tech guys much smarter than them in fact are specialized in lowly stuff and need the high level idea guys to provide philosophical guidance or else we all die. Incredibly common sight in startups that should never have started up (and fail invariably).