I don't think this captures the essence of macro economic theories. In my view, the key insight is that you must think about the money  balances people hold (carefully distinguishing money from wealth here), how trade affects that balance and how they attempt to optimize it. 

In particular with sticky prices, the 'hot potato effect' becomes important. You might also hear it called, 'monetary disequilibrium', 'excess cash balances mechanism' and probably some other things as well. The Keynesian concept of the “Paradox Of Thrift” is related, though less well developed. I've written more about it [here](http://goodmorningeconomics.wordpress.com/2010/12/05/the-logic-of-monetary-disequilibrium/).

consider an economy initially at equilibrium with a fixed quantity of money and prices that adjust to changes only after some time (sticky prices). Some people in the economy decide they want to hold higher money balances than they had in the past:

When people hold less money than they would like, they try to increase their holdings of money in two ways: 1) try to reduce their spending 2) try to increase their income. The quantity of money is fixed, so if one person holds a higher nominal quantity of money than before, all others must hold a lower quantity of money than before in aggregate. Prices are fixed, so this is also true for the real quantity of money. When one person reduces their spending, they reduce the income of others in the economy. Unless those others desire to hold less money than before, they now hold less money than they would like. Now those others also try to increase their money holdings by the same means. This is a vicious circle and aggregate spending and incomes decline. The circle ends when people no longer want to reduce their their spending to achieve higher money balances.

There are two effects which determine how far this process proceeds. 1) The quantity that people want to hold is positively related to the quantity people expect to spend, so as people expect to spend less they will need to hold somewhat less money. 2) As people reduce their spending, those reductions become more painful, so will be more reluctant to trade off consumption for increased money balances.