I think UDT reasoning would go like this (if translated to human terms). There are two types of mathematical multiverse, only one of which is real (i.e., logically consistent). You as a UDT agent gets to choose which one. In the first one, UDT agents one-box in this Genetic Newcomb Problem (GNP), so the only genes that statistically correlate with two-boxing are those that create certain kinds of compulsions overriding deliberate decision making, or for other decision procedures that are not logically correlated with UDT. In the second type of mathematical multiverse, UDT agents two-box in GNP, so the list of genes that correlate with two-boxing also includes genes for UDT. 

Which type of multiverse is better? It depends on how Omega chooses which gene to look at, which is not specified in the OP. To match the Medical Newcomb Problem as closely as possible, let's assume that in each world (e.g., Everett branch) of each multiverse, Omega picks a random gene look at (from a list of all human genes), and puts $1M in box B for you if you don't have that gene. You live in a world where Omega happened to pick a gene that correlates with two-boxing. Under this assumption, the second type of multiverse is better because the number and distribution of boxes containing $1M is exactly the same in both multiverses, but in the second type of multiverse UDT agents get the additional $1K.

&gt;I presume that most LWers would one-box.

I think the reason we have an intuition that we should one-box in the GNP is that when we first read the story, we implicitly assume something else about what Omega is doing. For example, suppose instead of the above, in each world Omega looks at the most common gene correlated with two-boxing and puts $1M in box B if you don't have that gene. If the gene for UDT is the most common such gene in the second multiverse (where UDT two-boxes), then the first multiverse is better because it has more boxes containing $1M, and UDT agents specifically all get $1M instead of $1K.