1. Get protein from non-meat sources.  Consider, in particular, eggs.  Monitor the sales at your grocer of choice; if they have a free loyalty program fill out their form and take their junk mail to get in on that.

2. See above

3. Buy canned beans in large amounts when they are on sale.  Or, consider trying to make a deal with a friend or neighbor where you split batches of beans and only have to do cooking some of the time.

4. This should admit of self-modification.  If you know your food will go off if not eaten, there is no waste or "not lasting longer" associated with eating it before that time.  But perhaps you need to work around it instead...

5. Heartburn can be medicated.  If you can't afford to get that checked out or afford the meds, eat around it...

6. I really do recommend eating, but would need to know more about the etiology of the habit before I offered advice on breaking it.

7. Consider sharing meals with friends/neighbors.  Or, get a freezer.  Freezers are *really* useful.

8. If you *can't* get a freezer, buy your veggies canned.  Many veggies come that way.  Cans are smallish.

9. Consider disposable dishes, or covering your dishes with something like plastic wrap and being careful with your utensils.  (Possibly expensive.)  Also, note that not every use of dishes requires washing between uses, especially if you are the only user: you can use a water glass for days as long as you don't leave a lot of water standing in it; you can brush crumbs of relatively dry foods off a plate and use it again; etc.  When you do have to wash dishes, soak them overnight with water and dish soap first, or at least rinse them out, to reduce the amount by which things cake on and to help give the grease a head start on dissolving.

10. Freezers are useful.  Like, a *lot*.

Veggies you did not mention include: miscellaneous greens such as turnip or collard, kale, spinach, green or wax beans, bamboo, peppers, artichokes, beets, water chestnuts.  (All of those things exist canned.)  Also, celery, celeriac, turnips, rutabagas, parsnips, miscellaneous sprouts, assorted squashes, fennel, leeks, scallions, avocados, cucumbers, broccoli, cauliflower, edamame, radishes, jicama, seaweed of various sorts.  I don't know if these ones are available canned.  (Seaweed has the advantage of being available dried.  You can reconstitute whatever amount you desire.)

As for what to do with them: Your favorites, tomatoes, onions, garlic, carrots, corn, and potatoes (plus most of what I just mentioned) can all be put in soups, stews, pot pies, sautés and stirfries, kabobs, and curries, or just eaten by themselves cooked or not with the spices/seasonings of your choice.  Google is your friend; search for [vegetable] recipe and see what pops up.  If you require more specialized help, pick some likely-looking veggies and I will locate or fabricate simple preparation instructions for you!