Nobody wrote:


The issue is not a desire to deprive Detweiler of the benefits of anonymity;
it is that he appears to do things which are designed to bring down the
remailer network.  By intentionally mass-posting to inappropriate news-
groups, and injecting exponentially-growing messages into the remailer chain,
he seems to be trying his best to deprive the benefits of the remailer net-
work to others.  This is, of course, in accordance with his well-known
position against anonymity.

If Detweiler succeeds, Nobody won't get to post anonymously (so to speak)
anymore.  I know that it is unfortunate that the remailer network is so
fragile that a lone crackpot is a significant threat, but presently that is
essentially what the situation is.


Pragmatically, I think that filtering Detweiler is more likely to provide
privacy than not doing so.  I understand the charges of inconsistency but
IMO the particular facts of a case are a better guide to the proper action
than abstract arguments.


If chained, encrypted remailing techniques are used, it is not a question
of "exposing" anyone.  Detweiler may be blocked from the network (if everyone
agrees to do so) but it won't be possible to find out just what he is being
blocked from doing.  Had he been sufficiently careful in the first place
there would not necessarily be any way of knowing who exactly was producing
the offensive messages.  In that case I believe most of the remailers would
no longer exist.


I suggest, then, that you run a remailer (it only costs $20 a month on the
system I use), and publicize the fact that Detweiler can use yours with
impunity.  Set up a mail-to-news gateway that other remailer operators can
use so that they don't have to worry about the consequences of abuse.
It's easy to talk about sacred ideas, but perhaps not so easy to keep an
unpopular and misunderstood remailing infrastructure in place.  "Xenon"
also accused us of hypocrisy, started up a remailer, and stopped it in just
a couple of days faced with these kinds of problems.


Detweiler is free to send any messages he likes; his service providers are
free to continue or terminate his accounts as they see fit; and remailer
operators are free to establish whatever policies they like for message
handling.  What better implementation of free speech could you want?