Ironically, I did not know about this brouhaha until reading about it
here today.  A few days ago I got this email:

	Subject: Premier Bob
	To: hfinney@jobe.shell.portal.com
	Date: Fri, 9 Dec 94 8:10:36 EST
	 
	Congrulations! Your forgery made the Globe and Mail today.

This meant nothing to me so I ignored it.  But on reading the article
this appears to be a major incident, involving heated accusations and
walkouts on the floor of the Ontario legislature.  The Portal system,
the internet service provider I use, has apparently taken some heat but
they have not contacted me.

A thread in can.politics titled "The Bob Rae Forgery Caper" includes a
copy of the original message.  Here are some excerpts from the Globe and
Mail article, which was widely cross-posted.


I do not have any logs of this message.  However, my remailer does not
insert any delays so it is conceivable that sendmail logs could give
some insight into message flow through the remailer.  I don't know what
obligation I would be under to cooperate with any investigation.  The
message itself had some pointed political satire but did not look to me
to violate any US laws.  There is not much I can do to help, anyway.
The article indicated that the legislature has now gone into recess for
the year so hopefully this will all be old news by the time they
reconvene.

One thing I do notice on reading the discussion in can.politics is the
fact that despite the disclaimers in the message headers, some people
took this as a forgery attempt on my part.  I wonder if it might be
necessary to insert disclaimers into the body of the message as
anon.penet.fi does, at least for messages to known mail-to-news
gateways.

There was also a misperception that my remailer was an official effort
endorsed by Portal (again, despite the disclaimers).  Note that it was
they who were contacted, not me (yet).  This might suggest that it will
not be possible to cleanly separate the remailer operators and service
providers when problems like this arise.  Both may end up being hassled
(time will tell whether I am).

It should be interesting to see what happens.