What's that smell?

Doesn't it seem a little... musty?  A little stale?  Something's getting
old.  Something needs to be changed.

It's your key.

There are a lot of old, stale keys out there.  Moldy, dusty keys a year or
two old.  It's time for those keys to change!

The need for regular change of public keys has not been emphasized enough.
The longer you use a key, the more likely something will happen which will
expose your secret.  Plus, it gives attackers more incentive to try to break
or steal your keys if they know they'll be able to decrypt messages for a long
time once they get them.

A lot of people seem to think of keys as quasi-permanent, sort of a
voluntary version of social security numbers.  One key, cradle to grave.
But this is not the idea at all.

I was reminded of this by Graham Toal's response to Bill Stewart:


Graham is thinking in terms of remailers which retain their keys for years.

What is a good interval for key changes?  I would suggest every year or so
makes sense, especially if infrastructure can be developed to make it easier
to propagate key changes.  Keys should be overlapped in time, so that you make
a new key and start using it, while continuing to support the old key for a
time.

But for remailers, I'd like to see a considerably accelerated key turnover
schedule - maybe every month, or every week.  This would help defeat the
kinds of attacks Graham is talking about.  And the remailers should securely
dispose of their old keys to the extent possible.

Granted, right now the difficulties of distributing keys are rather high,
so the costs of changing keys may be large.  But as this technology becomes
more available, key changes should be scheduled regularly.

PGP has some fields for key expiration, but support for that was never
implemented.  The idea was that you would get warned when it was time
for you to change to a new key.  Users of old keys would be warned as well
that they should try to find out the new key they should use.  All this
was not done because there wasn't time.  Hopefully the feds will change their
mind about pursuing legal sanctions against PGP developers and progress can
be made again.