Jason W Solinsky <solman@MIT.EDU> writes, quoting me:



One thing I'd add is that Charles still makes money whenever there is a
challenge.  If there were no challenges then there would be nothing to
keep people honest.  So it's not a matter of eliminating pay per use of
certifications, it's just a matter of the frequency with which they are
used vs other kinds.

Also, as the challenges become less frequent, Charles can actually raise
his rates and still let everyone else make money.  He can even charge
more than the 10 that Micro is paying for challenges, which he could
probably not have done in the non-probabilistic (pre-Ingve) system.  It
sounds like Micro is paying the challenge fees (in at least one version)
and if the penalties against cheaters are great enough it won't challenge
very frequently, in which case a larger fee by Charles can be absorbed.


Another approach, BTW, is the "undeniable" signature, which allows an
authorization which can only be checked with the cooperation of the
issuer.  (One of the ones Chaum came up with was described in a posting I
made last weekend.)  But again, the same "problem" arises where people
could check only a fraction of signatures with voluntary penalty clauses.
There is also the reseller who checks a signature interactively, paying
Charles' fee, then sells his own certifications that you have a valid
Charles certification, only these are use-many.  The thing is, the amount
of information being provided in a certification like this is so small
(in effect, one bit) that the "information copying" problem hits pretty
hard!  If you can't stop people from copying a 1 MB game you're going to
have a tough time keeping that single bit corralled.


These tend to be non-local solutions, with a lot of overhead and extra
mechanisms.  Maybe you can make it work with your "government" but I'm
afraid you may come to lean on it as the solution to all of your
problems.  Why bother with cryptography for anything; just have a
"government" where everybody has posted a ruinous bond which they forfeit
if they break a "law", then legislate communications privacy, non-
duplication of electronic cash, bit commitments, etc., with heavy
incentives for people to report cheaters?


Again, though, people could just swear they've seen a Charles certificate
and these witnesses will undercut Charles.

As I said, I think there will still be a place for per-use
certifications, but the market will decide how much they are used vs
other kinds.  I don't think you should worry so much about trying to fine
tune the system so this one technology wins.  There are a lot of
possibilities that people may come up with.