I agree with this, which is why I don't understand why you said:


You're jumping the gun here a little, aren't you?  There is no evidence
yet that Chaum's current proposals are going to catch on.  The CommerceNet
idea seemed to have more backing judging from the press releases.  And it
did not appear to support anonymous transactions.


I don't follow this argument.  You are suggesting that an anonymous cash
market would be more efficient than one based on checks and credit cards?
It would have lower transaction costs, so things would be available for lower
prices?  Why is this?  The hypothetical discussions we've had here on "if I
ran an anonymous bank" often talked about service charges.

Your use of the term "capstone" is unclear in this context.  Are you suggesting
that retaining privacy is more important for most people than trusting a
seller in most transactions?  Most people would rather buy from FlyByNight
Corp if they could stay anonymous than from Sears using their credit card?
I don't think so.  For some people, the kind who won't use checks today and
get by with cash and money orders, this might be true.  But I don't see
it as being the rule.


It seemed to me that the IMP list discussions degenerated into flame wars
between Detweiler and cypherpunks.  Those in the middle, which included
most subscribers, were shocked and disgusted by Detweiler's crude flaming
and this made everyone uncomfortable about bringing up the topic of anon-
ymity and cash.  With Detweiler on the list it was impossible to have a
serious discussion of the matter.


Chaum is trying to make money off his ideas.  In doing so, he is being
guided by the invisible hand of the market to try to find those niches where
his technologies can be most profitable.  Maybe going after the bankers is
the wrong idea, but it is understandably tempting to prefer trying to get
millions of dollars from a few people than a few dollars from millions of
people.  It does sound, though, like he is trying to branch out now and
spread his technology around.  Perhaps he will follow the lead of RSA and
make a "ChaumREF" free implementation of his cash technology.  The Commerce-
Net model had RSA supplying free client software while charging the vendors
licensing fees, I believe.  Chaum may be planning a similar approach.

It would be nice to see more details about what Chaum has in mind.  My
WWW access is very weak.  Could someone summarize what is available
at the page listed above?