Andrew Lowenstern <andrew_loewenstern@il.us.swissbank.com> writes:


Yes, I think as Tim mentioned that safe-tcl is a possible way to go here.
You could really do a lot of what Telescript promises with safe-tcl, and
it is completely open and non-proprietary so anybody could run a server.

Basically, safe-tcl is a limited subset of the tcl scripting language
designed to allow "active mail", which can contain programs to run either
at the time the mail is put into your mailbox or at the time you read it.
Most of their interest is in the latter, because since tcl is married to
the X scripting package tk, you can actually have an incoming mail
message which puts up its own X dialog boxes, etc.  Somebody wrote a
sample mail-based tictactoe game, where you click in a box and it
automatically sends an appropriate program to the other player which will
put up the game board and let him click, etc.  Imagine this for crypto
protocols.

But, back to the remailers, as Andrew says this agent-based or "active"
mail provides a whole new paradigm for viewing remailers.  Rather than
being this anarchic threat to the net as they are often pasted, they are
simply one of a wide class of servers.  If we can move to a model in
which semi-autonomous agents do surf the net, then remailers become just
a small part of a much bigger picture.  I may allow incoming agents to
use various resources on my machine, including the mail facilities.  A
remailer is then just a server which does not enforce a lot of
state information on outgoing messages to record their incoming path.

I suppose the thing to watch for here will be efforts on the part of
net.control freaks to force agents to be carefully authenticated,
regulated, ordered and tracked.  Just as the mail specs (RFC822)
emphasize the importance of a human owner of every piece of mail so you
have someone to complain to, similar motivations may play a part in
future specs for active mail and similar extensions.  This is going to be
a continual battle which we will have to be ready for.