I believe RSA requires a notarized statement, where you have presented the
notaries with three forms of ID.  I would imagine that notaries have some
experience with false ID, but no doubt they can be fooled with sufficient
effort.  Still, for the kinds of applications we are talking about here
(chatting on the net) this is probably adequate.  For more security
you could require a thumbprint which is compared with others on file.


Chaum was writing more about financial relationships with creditors,
businesses, etc.  My translation of his ideas into the cyberspace author-
ship arena was not something he discussed directly.


In one way it is easier than with pgp.  With pgp we are trying to guess
whether a person is really who he says he is.  This has all sorts of real-
world implications, and as tmp points out these are hard to verify.  With
reputation systems what you really want to know is whether a person's
endorsements are valuable.  Over time you can basically decide this for
yourself, by judging whether those authors recommended by a given person
are ones which you consider good.  Those endorsers whose opinions match
your own would be the ones you pay the most attention to.


With Chaum's system it should not necessarily dilute your reputation to
use a lot of pseudonyms.  OTOH, you are right that informal reputations will
not carry over, and in practice these will be important.


Negative endorsements, and negative credentials in general, are difficult
to achieve.  Chaum's paper has some discussion of these but it is
hard to follow.

The simple blinded signature model provides a pretty simple way to allow
only one pseudonym per True Name in a given forum, if you assume there is
some way to distinguish people in the real world.  Suppose Cypherwonks
wanted only one person per nym.  And suppose there was an agency which
was able to distinguish people, that is, it could tell when it had seen the
same person twice.  Now, Cypherwonks asks this agency to give a single
blinded signature of a type (exponent) which is unique to that list, to
anyone who wants it, but such that nobody gets more than one.

To be accepted on the Cypherwonks list, then, somebody would have to show
a signature of this particular type, different from everyone else's.  Each
person could only get one such token, which Chaum has called an is-a-person
credential (again, this is a simplification of his idea, I think).

Now tmp has what he wants, the ability for a list to have only one nym
per person.  And in such a situation, negative reputations are important,
because you only get one chance and can't start over with a new nym.


Well, you have to trust that the agency which is verifying uniqueness of
identity doesn't cheat.  But note that the agency does not get any great
privacy-infringing power, as they don't have to know the True Names or
identities of the people they are endorsing, and they don't know their
pseudonyms (since those are blinded when they are signed).


Chaum did, as I said, have some concept about revealing negative
credentials, perhaps along the lines you are suggesting.  As I followed his
ideas (which wasn't very well), you would have to submit an "I'm not a
jerk" credential with each posting, and the only way to get another
such token would be to get back a response from your posting saying, "OK,
you're still not a jerk."  But if you posted some trash ("Death to
BlackNet") then you wouldn't get back that "OK" token and you'd have lost
your "not a jerk" token for good.  This would work best in a situation
where there was one nym per person, otherwise he could use his other nyms
to endorse his worthless trash.

(I posted a variation on this idea a couple of weeks ago as a way of
handling anonymous remailer complaints without breaking the anonymity of
the remailer user.  A similar token-and-response system was used, also
based closely on the blinded signature system in Magic Money.)


Well, Larry, you have to realize that you caused us enormous hassle
several months ago, so it's natural that people will be somewhat hostile.
Other pseudonymous posters have not stirred nearly so much interest
(with the possible exception of Xenon, who had some of your own tendencies
to rant at length).  However, in your new incarnation I find your postings
much more interesting.


Chaum has some discussion about how you can go to library A and borrow a
book, proving that you have no overdue books at libraries B, C, D, ...,
without compromising your anonymity.  This sounds analogous to proving that
you have no negative credentials from other cyberspace forums.  Unfortunately,
this is a part of his paper I need to read more times to understand.