hughes@ah.com (Eric Hughes) writes:



It was nice to finally meet Eric and other CP's at the Crypto conference.

To me, double-spending is analogous to passing bad checks.  I don't think
people will be satisfied to simply view it as a formal property, any more
than they are in the case of checks.  In either case you are getting an
explicit or implicit assurance from the payor that the instrument is
good.  Intentionally cheating would be viewed as fraud.  I think this
approach would increase the likelihood of digital cash being accepted.


That's a big "if".  I don't follow the proposed solution below.

In any case, discussions about the role of identity are purely
speculative.  I think what we want is a system where people are free to
use these technologies as they wish.  If one bank offers certain
advantages to people who are willing to authenticate their identity (as I
think some will), that is fine.  If a person chooses not to take
advantage of those opportunities because he doesn't want to divulge his
identity, that is fine, too.  The real question is the degree to which
adding identity authentication increases the likely range of situations
that can be covered in a privacy-protecting way, and the degree to which
it may lower costs.



The problem is, the fraud doesn't occur (typically) when the note is
redeemed at the bank, it occurs when the note is exchanged at the
market.  Is this proposing to charge the merchant when he in good faith
turns in the cash which was given to him by the customer, and it turns
out bad?  What cruel irony!  Here he is already cheated once, and the
bank will charge him an extra fee as additional punishment?

I must be misunderstanding.  This seems not to deter double-spenders at
all.


Here I am lost completely.  Whose identity is in escrow?  The person to
whom the coin is given in the first place?  But I thought we were
referring to a double-spending protocol in which users revealed their
identity to the bank.  Apparently not?  Is the idea here that the bank
doesn't know the user's identity, but some other escrow holder does, and
it gets revealed only if the user double-spends 10 times?  But that would
still be identity-based, just with different rules about when it gets
exposed.  I really don't follow this at all.

To me, there is no problem with revealing identity in certain situations
as long as it is unlinkable to my other activities..  And I will be much
more willing to lend credit or other forms of trust to pseudonyms if I
know that they are willing to pay the ultimate price of punishment to
their own very physical bodies if they cheat me.  What more assurance
could I want?  And yet, as long as all parties are honest, we have no
fear of our identities being revealed against our will.

This is no more a contradiction than is the existance of one-way functions.
Both are manifestations of control over information flow.  If this
control is possible, why not make use of it?