These are good points.  However I think your presentation is a little too
oriented towards the libertarian perspective of distrusting government,
and also comes off sounding harshly competitive:


I think most people don't think so much in terms of winners and losers,
of beating and being beaten.  Rather, I think it will be more acceptable
to couch the issue in simple privacy terms.  People do value their
privacy.  I don't think you have to overly justify the value of privacy.
A few examples of how little privacy people could actually have in a
non-anonymous network of the future should suffice to establish
motivation IMO.


I like this phrase!  It nicely connotes the transparency of the nets.


This is where I think you are getting too libertarian for a broad
audience.  Also, this wording invites the reader to assume that anonymity
will lead to tax avoidance and evading laws.  Most people feel that they
are paying their own taxes, and if others avoid them then it just
increases the burden on themselves.  So except to certain selected groups
I would avoid playing this angle up.  I think your next argument
will have wider appeal:


Be aware that this is in fact the "mainstream" solution to the problem.
There was some discussion on comp.org.eff.talk of some kind of committee
headed by EFF board member Esther Dyson which issued a statement on
privacy protection in the nets.  They issued the by-now traditional call
for laws along the lines of "information collected for one purpose cannot
be used for another purposes".  Like, VISA can't sell data on your
spending patterns, at least not without telling you.  Nobody criticized
this point; even the relatively net-aware civil liberties types mostly
explicitly endorsed this provision.  Laws like this are apparently
already in place in Europe.  So the momentum is in exactly this
direction.

I think your arguments are good ones; the government would undoubtedly
exempt itself from such rules (the IRS is already starting to use
dataveillance and matching to look for discrepencies between tax returns
and spending patterns), plus such provisions would seem to require a
labyrinth of exceptions, special cases, etc.  Eventually I could see laws
telling exactly what a business can and cannot do with the names of
people who phone or net in for information; yes, they can be kept on a
list for up to 6 months and sent additional promotional literature,
except that the business must require standard form 11832 to allow the
customer to get his name off the list, which must be handled within 5
working days for businesses with more than 100 employees, etc., etc.  You
could have volumes of this kind of stuff.  I think Tim wrote some essays
a long time back pointing out the absurdity of this approach, especially
if you tried to apply it to private individuals.


That's a good summary.  This is definately an uphill battle, though.  I
see no significant standards body or organization of influence (except
for CPs, to the extent that we have any influence) which is moving in
this direction.  Add to this the costs of anonymity as Wei has been
discussing and it really isn't clear how to proceed.