Realistically, though, everybody is not a remailer, and there are no
prospects of everybody becoming a remailer anytime soon, so the analyses
of Wei and others are certainly relevant.


Mixmaster is supposed to do splitting and, I think, padding.  I hope to
have time to look at it soon.  It sounds very good.


I did not see why this should be done.


A better approach IMO is to embed the message length in the encrypted
information (as PGP does) and pad with cryptographic random garbage
(which PGP could be patched to do).


Why does the remailer care where the message came from?  What difference
does that make?  I can see the final recipient caring about the original
sender, so a PGP sig makes sense at that level, but why at each hop?


I don't think so.  The problem with Miron's extropy remailer is that it
only passes through the contents of a PGP block.  For anonymous addresses
to work, the (chained,encrypted) address must be in a PGP block which
precedes the message body.  I don't see how any cutmarks idea would
affect this.


Again, why does the remailer go to all this trouble to verify a
signature from Alice?  That sig is for Bob!  She may not even want to
post her public key for everyone; Bob may be the only one who has it.  I
don't understand why the remailer, which exists to hide identities, is
going to such trouble to verify them on its own.


Alice is the one who should encrypt the message for Bob, not the
remailer!  Are you suggesting that she should let the remailer see the
message contents?


Why on earth does he care?  I really don't see what problem you are
solving here with all this checking.


Eve would be more likely to subpoena Chaum's secret key ring.  A public
key ring proves nothing.


This mostly makes sense (although as I said I prefer simply enhancing the
crypto program to take a parameter for output pad size) but I don't see
where all the rest of it came from.


I believe Mixmaster provides a client mode to do this.  I prefer putting
more functionality in the hands of the users and not relying on kindly
old Uncle Remailer to do it for you.


This is a commonly made suggestion, but philosophically I am opposed.  We
got into this fix (lack of privacy) by letting people rely on others to
do things for them.  It's time for people to take responsibility on their
own.  The kind of thing you are suggesting provides the illusion of
privacy.  Never trust remailer operators!


Since the secret key d is effectively a random number from 0 to m, you
would have to create, say, 1000 key pairs to have a good chance of
finding a d that was as much as 10 bits shorter than m.  Then o(d) might
be 5 bits shorter.  So you'd be done from 768+384 to 758+379 or about a
1% reduction in time.  And it will take a while to generate 1000 keys.
To get a 2% reduction you would have to generate 1000000 keys.  I hope
you have a lot of time on your hands.

I'm sorry to have been so negative, but this message is part of a long
tradition advocating putting more responsibility into the remailer net.
I strongly feel that better solutions put power into the users' hands.
I oppose centralized solutions.