I can see the advantage from the sender's point of view.  If I sign all
messages I send, then I have some defense against the charge that I sent a
particular message, if it doesn't bear my signature.  (OTOH the
prosecutors can argue that I simply skipped signing that one.)  This does of
course expose me to the risk that if I _did_ send a particular message,
my signature will be incriminating.  In any case I am still puzzled by
your statement that you as a remailer operator would want to be able to
verify the source of all incoming messages.  Would you do things
differently with messages from different sources?  I hear you saying
that you care if you get a message claiming to be from Alice but not
bearing a good signature from her.  Why?  Again, what would you do
differently?


PGP already includes a cryptographically protected length field in the
message.  It will ignore any data past that, according to my experiments.
All that is needed is a simple patch to add junk data to the end.


I still don't quite follow this.  Exactly what attack would be possible
against Miron's remailer if it allowed encrypted reply blocks (as all
others do) which would fail if the messages were wrapped as you suggest?


Alice may not have a key whe wants the general public to use - she may
just be using one for her private correspondents.  Actually it seems to
me given the nature of remailing that it would be superior if it were
easy for people to "spoof" my use of the remailer.  That would give me
more credence to claim innocence.  The more useless return addresses are,
the less we even need remailers.


It's not my job to fix the damn Internet.  So what if I get mail claiming
to be from abc when it's actually from def?  I of all people care the
least, specifically because I throw away this data.  Virtually everyone
else on the net cares where their mail comes from, but I don't.  My whole
purpose is to discard the information about where it comes from.  That is
why I am so confused about your emphasis on checking signatures.


Although I agree with Wei Dai's mathematics, to my mind it points up the
importance of successful countermeasures rather than implying that the
remailer network is inherently insecure.  For example, if you send one
identical message every batch, Wei's math shows clearly that you can't be
traced.  Let's not get rumors started about how the remailers don't
work.


Do you see your suggestion as protecting against Wei's in/out correlation
attack?  I don't see it.  If fixed-sized packets are used, with chained
encryption, I think you have as good a system as you do with all of your
inter-node encryption and signing.

Suppose one good encrypted message enters the net with 10 unencrypted
ones.  Won't the full path of each of the 10 be visible to an outsider?
Even if the remailer helps out those 10 doltish users by encrypting them
from there on out, the outsider already saw their whole paths!  They will
know how many unencrypted messages are going out to each destination, and
from that determine where the encrypted message is going.


Yes, I see that you are right about this.  It would be easy to generate
e,d pairs and get a d which is significantly short on 1's by 10% or more.
I did not quite follow your algorithm to do this (was n the modulus or
was it phi, the sum of the modulus' divisors?).  The one caveat is that
if "high-zero" decryption exponents are widely used, it could conceivably
reduce the search space somehow, although I don't see offhand how to
exploit this.