m5@dev.tivoli.com (Mike McNally) writes:



I can certainly agree with the attractive simplicity of this notion.  My
point is that it is practically useless.  I believe this is a seductive
but very wrong idea.  As I said, it amounts to defining the problem away.
Does that mean that the problem (of MITM attacks) never existed at all,
that all of the effort that people have spent over the year to try to
solve it was wasted?  I am baffled by the fact that people are taking
this whole notion of "communicating with keys" seriously.  Keys do not
communicate.

One might as easily say that wiretaps are not an issue: I am not
communicating with the person I called, but with the other end of the
telephone wire.  If that wire end is actually (unknown to me) in the
hands of a government agent who has cut the wire and interposed his own
listening device, that's OK, because I'm still communicating with the
other end of the wire.  After all, I have no way of knowing whether the
person that I am talking to may actually be spreading my info to
anyone, so it doesn't really make any difference if he does it or the
wiretappers.  Etc., etc.  This is exactly like the argument about
communicating with keys.  Does this mean that we shouldn't worry about
wiretaps?  I hope not.  I really don't understand why the argument is
so much more persuasive in the case of keys.



The difference is that I form a judgement about the personality of the
person I am communicating with, whereas I can't form any such judgement
about the personality of the MITM.  Consider how, in life, we decide who
to trust.  Isn't it largely on the basis of communications?  We talk to
the person, we talk to other people about him, we take what we know of
him, and we decide to trust him.  If we suppose that there is in fact a
secure channel to another person, then I suggest that it is plausible to
suppose that we could enter into a trusted relationship with him, even
without a face-to-face meeting.  After all, what exactly does the face to
face meeting accomplish?  Yes, we see a little more about the person, we
can judge some non-verbal communications.  But it is not wholly
different.

We can always be wrong - the person may not be as trustworthy as we think
he is.  There is some probability of that which we must always keep in
mind.  But, and here is my main point, if a MITM is a possibility (and
we're taking the attitude that that's just fine, we're communicating with
keys, no problem if there's a MITM involved, don't bother to take any
steps to prevent it) then these assumptions about extending trust are a
lot riskier.  The probability of a betrayal will be much higher if a MITM
is possibly involved than if he is not.  Most people do not try to betray
their communicants.  But if (in the worst case) all lines were tapped by
men in the middle, then in fact all conversations are subject to this
betrayal.  As I wrote before, I don't see the difference between this
situation and one where there is no security at all (at least from
wiretappers).



Most of the time your judgement about the real person will be valid, at
least with some experience.  Most people are not AI's or teams of
conspirators.  But you have absolutely no basis to make judgements about
the MITM.  In fact the greater probability is that his interests are
opposed to yours.



I don't think so, or at least the risk can be minimized much more than in
the model where we just say that we're communicating with keys, therefore
a MITM is perfectly legitimate because it's just a matter of who holds
the keys.  Suppose I want to talk to PC Magazine columnist John Dvorak.
Suppose I find a VeriSign certificate for his key, with his name and
employment information.  I've never met him.  We've never had a face to
face conversation.  Yet I claim I can communicate with considerable
security with Dvorak using this certificate, certainly more than if I
just use any old key which is lying around with his name on it, one which
may be owned by a MITM.




If you are in fact communicating with the person you think you are, you
can use all the information you have about him (including other
conversations) to judge his personality and trustworthiness.  Yes, this
can be mistaken - but the same thing happens in the real world.  That
doesn't mean that we abandon the whole idea of trust.  We still can be
right most of the time.  However if you know that a MITM may be involved,
you will be much slower to extend trust.  In fact you have to act as
though you have an unsecured channel.



No, by definition the "communicatee" is the set of all the people who
see your messages.  So by definition between you and the communicatee
there is security even without encryption (since no one other than the
communicatee sees the message).  Sophistry?  The number of people who can
receive your messages is no greater without encryption than if you use
encryption but don't take steps against a MITM and in fact adopt a stance
which states that MITM attacks don't exist.



I don't know for sure, but if you tell me or give me the impression over
a period of time that you are keeping our conversations private, and I
decide that you are honest based on our conversations and what I know
about you from others, then I can make a judgement with a reasonable
chance of safety.  Yes, I can be mistaken.  But that doesn't mean that I
should abandon the whole idea of trust.  Otherwise I will never trust
anybody in any part of life.  But preventing MITM attacks is very
important to being able to extend trust in the online world.  Defining
them away is not a satisfactory solution.