Wei Dai <weidai@eskimo.com> writes:


This has a lot of potential uses.  It would be good if chaining were
possible, although that requires the client to double-encrypt.  That way
it can let people connect out without local snoopers seeing where they
are connecting.  However for this to work it is necessary that the DNS
lookup be done by the server rather than the client, and for the
destination (to which the server is supposed to connect) to be passed
encrypted.

I should mention by the way that I don't share the general pessimism
towards anonymous TCP/IP connections.  While truly strong anonymity
against a hugely powerful opponent is difficult, I think a system like
what Wei is describing would still provide important privacy protections
as more people get hooked into the net.

It should be noted that SOCKS V5 has basically the functionality that Wei
is describing, but I am not sure whether any implementations exist.  It
also has some other features which might not be appropriate for
this use.  The purpose of SOCKS is to tunnel through firewalls.


Unfortunately there is a also huge misuse of this program, as a
connection laundry for breakin attempts.  Hackers already go through
layer after layer of broken accounts, etc. to make tracebacks
difficult.  Read Stoll's "Cuckoo's Egg" for one account.  I think the
Mitnick story is similar.  These packet laundries would be extremely
inviting for this purpose.  The first time the ETT server is the base
of a lot of breakin attempts to military installations there is going
to be trouble.  SOCKS provides a config file for servers to limit what
kinds of connections will be allowed, but it is hard to see how to
filter out the bad guys while letting people go through who are
using services for which they are authorized.

Even if you don't try to provide anonymity with this service I think it
is still going to be a problem if breakins come from the server.  By
the time the traceback is initiated it is going to be a pain to figure
out where the connection was coming from.  The service would be similar
in this context to providing free guest accounts to which you could
telnet in and then telnet out.  I think any site which did this (some
used to in the relaxed old days) would take a lot of heat today.

I was toying with a limited form of this idea earlier, where outgoing
connections would be limited to http servers.  These are usually on a
small number of ports, although there are exceptions.  At least it
would be possible to filter out telnet and rlogin and such for that
application.  I don't think there are too many bad things you can do
just by connecting to httpd ports (probably I would be surprised,
though...).  But doing that would not make as much sense for the ETT
application.