I thought this was very interesting and I appreciate Unicorn taking the
time to lend us his expertise.


I didn't understand what distinguishes civil and criminal sanctions.  Is
it the nature of the proceedings, whether it is a civil or criminal case
that is before the judge?  Or is it the nature of the contempt charge
itself, where not doing what the judge wants, in broad terms, is civil
contempt?  And in that case, what would be criminal contempt?


Would there be a distinction between contempt by a witness and that by
the defendant (in a criminal case)?  I could see justification for
attempting to compel testimony from a witness who can shed needed light
on guilt or innocence in the case.  A man's freedom or perhaps his very
life is at stake.  But it seems to be another matter to compel the
defendant himself to provide some information which will be detrimental
to himself.

The defendant has some Fifth Amendment rights, but for those cases
where what he is ordered to do has been found not to be protected by
the Fifth Amendment it still seems bizarre to imagine him jailed for
contempt if he refuses.  Are there precedents for holding a defendant in
contempt for standing mute at his own trial?

(Part of my problem with this scenario is my sense that despite gradual
erosion of the rights against self incrimination, verbally revealing a
pass phrase which will unlock an encrypted document seems like
testimony, and something which should be protected.  Is there such a
difference between "Reveal the pass phrase" and "Reveal what you did with
the knife", if the judge doesn't believe the denials of the ability to
comply?)


I would guess that "turning over a key" here refers not to production to
the court by rather to passing a physical key between two contesting
parties, say a seller and buyer of some property that the key gives
access to.  The phrase "turning over" rather than "production of" suggests
this interpretation.  So this sounds like something which would be more
likely to occur in a civil proceeding than a criminal one.