I was speaking of present conditions.  If and when proven-secure Unix
systems start being used as remailer servers on the net then it may be
worthwhile having a larger key.

The point is that there is no advantage in strengthening an element of
the system which is not its weakest link.  Factoring my remailer keys
of 510 bits is not, I am sure, the easiest ways of finding the secret
keys.


It's not clear that this is the case, though, is it?  What is the rate of
creation of new remailers?  It doesn't seem that high to me.  We can't
know how quickly they are being broken, but it is just a matter of
getting root privileges on the remailer machine.  From what I hear of the
capabilities of experienced hacker/cracker types, it is very possible
that remailers are being broken faster than they are being created.  Of
course, there is no way to know.


I meant that the home PC system would have an ongoing connection to the
net, perhaps in the form of periodic uucp or POP connections.  By using
batching, traffic analysis would be no easier for such a system than for
any other.


I am not sure what you mean by this.  My experience is that new CERT
advisories come out every few months which represent security holes big
enough to steal remailer keys.  The most recent one, out just a couple
of weeks ago, is a bug in sendmail and maybe some other programs which
could allow remote users to get root access if they have access to a
DNS server:
ftp://cert.org/pub/cert_advisories/CA-96.04.corrupt_info_from_servers

Even if a remailer host operator is on the ball and fixes each one as
it is announced, he still was vulnerable before the announcement was
made.  In many cases these bugs are found by hackers who exploit them for
bad purposes before the good guys figure out what they are doing.

Suppose a reasonably large prize of several hundred or a few thousand
dollars were offered for someone who could break in and steal the key
of some remailer on a net-connected Unix system.  Wouldn't you agree
that the prize would be claimed before too long?


No, my point is that it doesn't really help to strengthen something which
is not the weakest link in the chain.  My rationale for having a short
key is that it more accurately reflects my estimate of the degree of
security provided by my remailer.  Actually probably an even shorter
length than 510 bits would be appropriate, maybe something more like 300
or 400 bits.  Going to a 1000 bit key would probably mislead people into
thinking that they only way an attacker could trace their message would
be by using a zillion mips-years of computing power or something.


Yes, I think I misstated my point here.  My real point was that large
keys are inappropriate.  Maybe you are right that it is easier to start
up a remailer than to break one.  On the other hand, unless you also break
the ones you don't run, you (as a LEA) are not in a position to
accomplish your presumed goal, which is to track criminal messages to
their source.  So in practice I think they would try to break remailers,
and again I am sure they will not do so by factoring keys, even for
mine.

It's also my personal impression that remailers are not mostly run by
LEA's, just on the basis of the occasional postings I have seen by
remailer operators here.  Frankly I doubt that remailers are enough of a
problem to be worth the effort on the part of a LEA to run one and deal
with all of the hassles.  But this may change in the future.