dlv@bwalk.dm.com (Dr.Dimitri Vulis KOTM) writes:

This is a potential problem, but there are some other considerations.

First, there is no particular reason why one recipient of some email from
the remailer should know or even suspect that other people have the same
email waiting.

Then, to defend against raids like this, the material could be separately
encrypted to each recipient.  There would be no way to know that material
sent to one recipient matched material sent to someone else.  The raiders
would just find a bunch of encrypted files.

Of course, if it were a sting operation, with the recipients being lured
or entrapped into requesting information they shouldn't, then the sender
might avoid using these countermeasures.  However, there wouldn't really
be any need to use a remailer for a sting operation like this, it could
be done just by offering the material from an ordinary address.

More generally, I think we need to keep in mind what a remailer does and
what it doesn't do.  The essential function of the remailer is to provide
anonymity via mixing messages.  It does not provide confidentiality of
message contents.  That has to be taken care of by encryption.  And,
as I wrote yesterday, it doesn't (can't) keep secret who the people are
who send and receive anonymous mail.  All it can do is to disguise which
particular people send and receive to each other.

The same is true of a DC-net or a perfect Chaumian mixnet.  These systems
do not disguise their particpants, or protect the confidentiality of their
message contents; they only hide the knowledge of who is talking to whom.

Having said that, I do like some aspects of this idea:


(The "default true" is going to allow the same kinds of abuse which we
have seen in the past.  Some remailers may be able to tolerate this, but
as we have seen, many can't.)


This is what I like.  It's a lot simpler than trying to keep a copy of
the anonymous mail and deliver it later when the person asks for it.
Just let him know that someone is trying to reach him anonymously, and
let him enable that if he wants to be able to receive the next anonymous
message that comes in for him.  You can load his permission message down
with all kinds of disclaimers that say he knows he's likely to receive
obscene, threatening and illegal material, that he doesn't mind, that
he knows the remailer is an automated system which doesn't look at the
contents, etc.  Not only does this give you a defense but it makes the
person think about what he's getting into, so he will in fact be better
prepared when something bad comes his way.

Plus, having taken positive action to enable receiving anonymous mail, he
will hopefully be more knowledgable about how to request that you stop,
and it won't be such a big deal.  He opens the pipe, and if he gets a
face full of sewage, he closes up the pipe right away.  You warned him.


Key servers wouldn't be the only place to store this information.  I think
the remailer could keep its own list, especially if it were defaulting
to "off".  This way recipients wouldn't have to generate and submit PGP
keys, which is more work than just sending a reply to a remailer giving
the OK to receive anonymous mail.


More cautious or politically vulnerable remailers might default in the
other direction.  It would be a matter of the individual situation.