Adam Back, <aba@dcs.ex.ac.uk>, writes:

Actually here in the U.S. most people have access to unmetered Internet
access these days.  Local and national ISP's are almost always that way,
and AOL offers that option now as well.  I find that I tend to browse in
"flurries", paging around a bit, then settling down to read for a while.

But you're right, I did not consider the interference among multiple
paths running through a jondo.  That issue applies to the higher speed
links as well.  If average path length is n, then on average there
will be about n paths going through each jondo (assuming all "home"
jondos have set up paths).  So the question will be whether the average
person uses more than 1/n of the bandwidth available during the time he
is connected.  This will no doubt depend on the pricing model for Internet
service, as you suggest.


Yes, latency would be cumulative, and I just tested mine and found it
was 160-220 ms, about the same as what you saw.  So running through say
5 jondos at the end of modem paths would add about a second of latency.
I think this would be fine if it only happened once per web page, but
almost intolerable if it was once per tiny picture.


This is an intriguing idea.  Secure multiparty calculation protocols allow
calculations to be made such that neither machine would have access to
all the data.  It is an interesting question how this could be applied
to the anonymous communication problem.

In this specific case, if the Crowds system were enhanced so that
end-to-end encryption was used (which seems very practical and useful),
you could run a jondo on your PC whose only function was to link to
the jondo on the ISP and then set up the additional path through the
jondo net.  The path between your local PC jondo and the end one in the
path would be encrypted, so even root on the local ISP could not see the
contents of what you send down the jondo path.  He might still be able
to see when you were sending and when not, but he couldn't tell where
it was going.