Eric Hughes suggests:


I'd extend Eric's idea
to say that mail to a non-anonymous address (like Deadbeat's postings to
Cypherpunks) should be shown as coming from "name5877" rather than
"an5877".  Then when we gullibly sent our true email addresses to him,
our Penet anonymous ID's would not be revealed (because the "reply"
command would send to "name5877" which would prevent the double-blinding).

But, what would we do for anonymous Usenet posts (assuming those are
still allowed)?  If they are shown as coming from "an5877" as they
are now, then Deadbeat's trick would work via posting to Usenet.
("Please send your current email address for information on the latest...").
If they are shown as coming from "name5877" then users who are
accustomed to the old way of working will find themselves not being
anonymized when they thought they would be.

Deadbeat suggests:


A problem with this is that I would have to remember, for each different
anonymous communicant I send to, whether I am using my "password" ID
or my "non-password" ID.  The difference would come down to what method
was used when I initially began communicating with this person.  If
the initial contact was in response to mail they sent to my "real" email
address, then I must remember to use the "non-password" ID for all
succeeding communication, on the theory that they know my real email
address.  OTOH, if the initial contact was to my anonymous address, then
I have to remember to use my "password" ID for all following communication,
so that I don't accidentally reveal my "non-password" ID, which some people
can link to my real address.

From this point of view, part of the problem appears to be the desire
to live in both worlds - the real world and the shadow world.  It will
be hard to keep track of which world each communication is in.

Perhaps Deadbeat's and Eric's ideas could be combined, where mail to
real email addresses would come from "name5877", and replies to such
addresses would use the "non-password" ID.  This might help people keep
track of how to reply to each message.  I still think there is a problem
with how anonymous posts should be labelled, and how replies to such
posts should be handled.