Back in the 90's on the cypherpunks mailing list, Wei Dai (of Crypto++ and
b-money fame) invented a system of anonymous lending. Of course the classic
problem with anonymous loans is that you don't know whose legs to break if
they don't pay it back. Wei solved this problem, with some conditions.  
  
The participants in the protocol are borrowers, lenders, and bystanders (who
don't want to lend or borrow right now, but might wish to do so on future runs
of the protocol). The key is that all participants are fully identified, to
the extent that they are vulnerable to that all-important leg-breaking.
Nevertheless, the protocol conceals the role of each participant, and the
amount they are borrowing or lending, if any.  
  
There needs to be a system of anonymous payments, and a simple trusted machine
called the Pot. (In practice, the Pot would be simulated by the participants,
using a cryptographic multi-party computation.)  
  
In a preliminary phase, participants would anonymously negotiate and agree on
the amount each person would borrow or lend, such that the total amount
borrowed equalled the total amount lent. The actual protocol then has four
phases, two for borrowing/lending, and two for repayment.  
  
Phase 1 is private. Each participant anonymously puts money into the Pot, and
gets in exchange a signed receipt for the amount. Lenders would put the most
money in, bystanders less, and borrowers little or none. You'll see why in a
moment.  
  
Phase 2 is public. The Pot now has a certain amount of money in it; this is
divided equally and distributed publicly to all participants.  
  
The borrowing/lending is now done. People who put more money in the Pot than
the per-person distribution in phase 2 are net lenders; people who put in less
are net borrowers; and people who put in the same amount are the bystanders,
with no net change. No one knows whether anyone else is a borrower or lender.  
  
When it is time to repay the loan, two more phases are run, the mirror images
of the first two.  
  
Phase 3 is public. Each participant publicly and verifiably puts back into the
Pot the exact amount taken out in phase 2 (or, that amount plus interest).
This is leg-breaking time! No excuses, everybody's got to pay up.  
  
Phase 4 is private. Each participant anonymously presents his receipt from
phase 1 to the Pot, and gets back that amount (or, that amount plus interest).
This unwinds the earlier transactions and all the funds are back where they
started.  
  
All that is visible publicly is that everyone splits up the pot evenly in
phase 2, and then returns that same amount in phase 3. But behind the scenes,
transfers of value are taking place. And failure to repay a loan means failure
to carry out phase 3, which be publicly visible and will lead to serious
consequences.

