I have enhanced the bc_key program to print interesting information about
transactions found in the wallet file.

Run it as:

(substitute your own wallet.dat location on mac and windows)

This dumps everything in the wallet, including keys and address book, but
let's just look at transactions:


I'll go ahead and violate my own privacy because I want to make a point.
Here's my output:

The big number is the transaction ID, suitable for plugging into
blockexplorer.com. Next is the bitcoin amount, your address that received the
bitcoins, and the date of the transaction. Finally come the optional words
change and spent. Change means this transaction produced change as a side
effect of a payment you made to others, and the address shown is the change
address, which is largely hidden in the client UI. Spent means that the
bitcoin(s) associated with this transaction have been spent and are no longer
available.

There are basically three types of wallet transactions. First are payments
from someone else to a wallet key. Next are payments to others which happen to
exactly use up one or more available transactions, with nothing left over.
These are shown as "payment" in the address field and are always marked as
spent. Last are payments where there were bitcoins left over, which get
returned to a new address. These are the ones which are shown as change.

To see the transactions which are available for spending, filter out the spent
ones with grep -v:


These are really my "bitcoins". They are what I have available to spend. The
sum of the bitcoin amounts should equal my wallet balance. Any spend I make
will come from one or more of these transactions. Generally, the Bitcoin
client will try to combine one or more small transactions to make a payment,
otherwise it will use the smallest single transaction capable of funding the
payment.

Although my wallet doesn't show it too clearly, it's not unusual for a single
Bitcoin address to be funded by multiple transactions. But for making
payments, this is basically irrelevant. Individual transactions are picked to
fund payments without regard to whether some of them happen to use the same
address.
