

Yesterday I attended the first Bitcoin meetup group in China.  
Photo here:
https://twitter.com/#!/rogerkver/status/199841022946185216/photo/1/large  
It was organized with only one day notice, but we had over 30 people show up.  
Some traveled several hours all the way from Hong Kong for the meeting.  
The Chinese version of Twitter, Weibo, was buzzing with talk about the Bitcoin
meeting.  
One of my vendors who attended the meeting emailed me today saying:  
  
_Thanks for your last night's dinner and your introduction of bitcoin. I'm
very interested in bitcoin even if I'm not quite understand how it workds.
Anyway I'd like to trade with you through bitcorn in furture.  
Let's talk about the 200 pcs of Finisar FCMJ-8521-3 GLC-T? How many bitcorns
would you buy them from me?  Thanks!  
_  
  
I suspect many of my vendors in China will now be much more open to the idea
of using Bitcoins for their normal day to day business transactions.  
I also know that there are currently talks between Russian telecom companies
and Chinese suppliers about conducting their payments via Bitcoin.  
  
  
In the meeting the following problem & Bitcoin solution was brainstormed, but
most of this idea came from Yifu Guo.  
  
  
1) Chinese love to Gamble  
2) Macau has gambling  
3) Chinese are not allowed to bring more than $6,000 USD worth of currency to
Macau.  
4)Chinese cash deposits for Bitcoin  
5)??  
6) PROFIT!  
  
  
The ideal way for something like this to occur is for a Macau based casino to
open their own bitcoin exchange.  
It could be open to casino customers only, or to people around the world.  
  
WIN: Customers would love it, because they can bring as much money to gamble
with as they want.  
WIN: Casinos would love it, because customers can bring as much money to
gamble with as they want.  
  
I can't think of any reason why anyone involved wouldn't like this idea.  
Myself and some of my Chinese friends intend to approach Macau casinos about
this idea.  
  
In order for this to become a reality we need:  
  
1\. An easy way for anyone in China to buy any amount of Bitcoins.  
2\. Casinos to allow cash IN/OUT via Bitcoins.  
  
For #1  
Bitinstant.com would like to allow everyone in China to be able to buy
Bitcoins, but we needs some help finding the right partner company in China.  
  
It will need the following requirements:  
  
1) No Chargebacks  
2) Easily available across China.  
3) Allows for automatic communication with the Bitinstant system via API.  
  
  
Can anyone recommend a company like this in China?  
  
  
For #2  
I suspect we only need to convince the Casinos that #1 is already in place.  
  
Please add your thoughts or suggestions to the above idea.  
Feel free to email me at roger@memorydealers.com  
I also do my best to tweet about interesting Bitcoin developments as they
happen.  
Follow me @rogerkver

