

So much FUD in one post!  

Quote from: TaunSew on July 16, 2017, 10:45:39 AM

Roger Ver at some point will probably be arrested and thrown into prison for
tax evasion. If it is true he has 300,000 Bitcoins then he's on the hook for
some $120+ million in back taxes to the IRS and penalties / interest from when
he left USA in 2014. I'm not sure about the IRS penalties but they could very
well seize everything he owns due to the obvious massive conspiracy to commit
tax fraud. The token amount he gave them years ago was nowhere close to his
owed amount.

Have you seen my tax returns? I spent close to $1M USD just on lawyers and tax
accountants alone to help me file everything exactly perfectly.  
I've paid the IRS millions upon millions of dollars and I've never had a "tax
problem" with the IRS ever, despite having been audited numerous times.  
  

Quote from: TaunSew on July 16, 2017, 10:45:39 AM

Actually this is also the guy who is also a convicted terrorist too, for
mailing explosives in the mail. So it's practically a step backwards to commit
something petty (by comparison to terrorism) like tax fraud.

My crime was "Dealing in Explosives **WITHOUT A LICENSE** ". I sold store
bought fire crackers on ebay, and my crime was doing it without the right
government paperwork. It was a politically motivated prosecution. Even while I
was in prison, the company I bought the fireworks from, and the manufacturer
were still selling them without a license. Details here.  
  
  

Quote from: TaunSew on July 16, 2017, 10:45:39 AM

Surprised Japan let him in and the various agencies aren't bothering him yet.
I guess Roger Ver avoiding drugs has kept him out of the spotlight or maybe
he's giving people envelopes full of cash?

Maybe it is because Japan is a freer country than the USA, and every
convenience store in the country sells fireworks in the summer time. Try
finding that in the land of the free.  
  

Quote from: TaunSew on July 16, 2017, 10:45:39 AM

But arguably Roger Ver's rambling and trying to assert an authority image has
hurt Bitcoin more than help it (especially the white legal side. The criminal
black side probably loves Roger Ver's libertarian rambles).  

I've arguably done more to help the legal side of Bitcoin adoption than anyone
else in the world. Go and read this book for the details. Calling my thoughts
"libertarian rambles" doesn't make them any less true. Taxation is theft. The
draft is kidnapping and slavery. War is mass murder funded by theft. I refuse
to condone any of those things.

