

Quote from: trentzb on March 29, 2012, 02:10:31 AM

Quote from: Phinnaeus Gage on March 28, 2012, 06:15:44 PM

You know what I like about this idea/thread? It's backed by Roger Ver,
somebody who already has an established presence on the web, thus offering an
official voice, of sorts, to other online entities, raising further awareness
to Bitcoin.  
  
~Bruno~  

  
Have you done business/trades with Roger? If so, and a success then great for
you. I tried recently and it failed miserably. I recovered my funds
fortunately, never thought Roger would keep them and he didn't, but the
experience definitively turned my wife off to Bitcoin trades. Now I have to do
it without her permission.  
  
Roger has done much for the Bitcoin community and I applaud that, however MD
needs some massaging with regard to how they treat customers...and not just
for Bitcoin trades, I have pointed several California and US based educational
institutions to buy fiber/other products from MD for years, they have reported
satisfaction in most but not all transactions.  
  
Keep up the Bitcoin support Roger, but massage Bitcoin physical trade TXs and
customer experience a bit. I think it would prove itself on your bottom line.  
  
  

  
Trent,  
Thank you so much for your past referrals.  
From what I recall of your specific order, you were trying to buy Bitcoins
from me via credit card.  
The card and information you were using set off just about every red flag
possible indicating credit card fraud.  
I am not saying that I think you actually were trying to commit CC fraud, but
it didn't look safe enough from my end to justify the risk.  
I don't think I even billed your CC, so I never even had your money.  
Unfortunately we have had to reject between 1/3 to 1/2 of our Bitcoin orders
due to the high risk of fraud,  
but I am glad to say after selling tens of thousands of dollars worth of
Bitcoins by CC and Paypal, I have not had a single fraudulent order slip
through.  
If anyone else is ever unhappy with an order, they are welcome to contact me
about it directly at any time.  
I will personally work to take care of any problem.  
roger@memorydealers.com

