

Quote from: Armis on February 26, 2014, 11:15:44 AM

You said you did the video purely as a favor to Mt Gox, kindly tell us who at
Mt Gox asked you to do the video?  

Either Mark or Gonzague.  
  

Quote

Who wrote the words that you read in that video?

I wrote it all myself.  
  

Quote

What was your relationship with Mt Gox, and it's CEO at the time of the first
video?

  
Nothing other than a customer of Mtgox.  
  

Quote

You specifically said: "I made a video stating that their fiat withdrawal
problems were not being caused by a lack of liquidity. I made no claims
regarding their solvency." You do realize that, "liquidity' and "solvency" are
symbiotic, and that any statement by you about Mt Gox at that sensitive time
would be construed as an endorsement?  

Having liquidity is no guarantee of solvency. In hindsight, we now know that
Mtgox has likely been insolvent for years.  
I'm sorry you have a hard time understanding the difference.  
  

Quote

Why would you endorse Mt Gox at that troubled time in their development?

Because as stated in the video, I am sure the fiat withdrawal delays at that
time were not caused by a lack of liquidity.  
In hindsight, I feel terrible about having made the video. I was deceived by
Mtgox, and my video led to who knows how many more people trusting Mtgox, and
losing money because of it. If I could go back in time, I would never have
made the video.  
  

Quote

In this video you said: "This issue was caused by poor programming skills and
a total lack of book keeping on the part of Mtgox", is it true that Mt Gox
allowed you to see their books, some of their financial records?

Isn't it clear to anyone who is paying attention? Mtgox lost everyones
bitcoins and didn't notice until 99% of them were gone.  
  

Quote

What did you know about their programming and bookkeeping and when did you
know it?

I found out this week as well.  
  

Quote

Was it before you invested the "... life changing amount of bitcoins stuck in
Mtgox" or just before making this new video.

I have had about 24,000 BTC from Bitcoinica stuck in Mtgox for over a year.
Mark refused to turn over those funds to the liquidator. Now any chance I had
of getting those back are gone too. **That likely makes me one of the people
who lost the most money out of everyone involved with this MtGox nightmare.**  
  

Quote

BTW: did you sign the petition to remove MT Gox CEO from the btc foundation.

I'm the one who directly asked Mark to step down.  
  

Quote

In what ways if any did you support the protesters at Mt Gox?

I wasn't in Tokyo for most of the protest, but the one day I was, I tried to
bring them hot tea.  
https://twitter.com/rogerkver/status/436663439214120960  
  

Quote

With answers to those questions we could get a glimpse of that picture you are
talking about.  

  
The picture I am talking about is Bitcoin, not my interactions with Mtgox.  
  
  
  

