Now is the chance to make an account and ask him.  
  
  
Some of his answers are already up:  
  
  
  
Great question! It took me about 8-9 months of full time work to get
Lighthouse to beta, working on my own. _But_ this comes with several caveats.
One is that I was working on other things during this time as well, like HD
wallets. Another is that a big chunk of the Lighthouse code is actually the
bitcoinj library, which I had been developing with many other people for years
by that point. So I had a great understanding of the tools I was working with.
If someone wanted to build an app like Lighthouse from scratch, it'd take them
longer as they'd have to get up to speed, even if they used the same tools and
frameworks I did.  
  
That said, what I've seen is that most developers don't want to build
downloadable P2P apps like Lighthouse or the original Bitcoin. They mostly
want to make web apps. Once I launched Lighthouse, a couple of devs came along
and built lightlist.io which is a web based version of Lighthouse, albeit with
fewer features. It took them much less than 8 months, though partly that's
because they were just reimplementing the Lighthouse design rather than doing
something new, and because a more centralised solution is often easier to put
together than something P2P.  
  
  
The only decision making process that should really matter is end users and
miners picking what software to run. At the moment this mechanism has broken
down completely due to a combination of censorship/DoS attacks and general
propaganda of the form "if you run something other than Core the sky will
fall". So the decision (non) making process used by Core has come under a lot
of scrutiny because at the moment Bitcoin is a centralised system run by just
one or two people (count differs depending on how you view things).  
  
I don't know if Bitcoin will eventually recover its decentralisation. For that
to happen users must feel empowered, and must learn to distrust even those who
claim to be unbiased experts (including me). Instead they must learn to pick
the software they use based on its merits rather than what the people writing
it choose to say, and be willing to switch at any point if the software they
use stops delivering.  
  
  
  
and many many more answers at: https://forum.bitcoin.com/ama-ask-me-
anything/i-m-mike-hearn-creator-of-lighthouse-bitcoinj-and-bitcoin-xt-ask-me-
anything-t2207.html

