

Quote from: lonelyminer on August 15, 2012, 11:38:28 AM

Quote from: MemoryDealers on August 15, 2012, 10:06:49 AM

1\. Amir is directly responsible for allowing the theft of what is currently
worth more than $500,000 worth of customer funds.  

The theft is an internal issue of Bitcoinica. Yes, it's a bad security
practice, yes, it could be a contract violation. But it's not our (creditors')
problem.  
  

Quote from: MemoryDealers on August 15, 2012, 10:06:49 AM

2\. Amir is directly responsible for the destruction of the only asset that
Bitcoinica had, that could have been sold to pay off the creditors. (The
proprietary Bitcoinica code)  

Amir did not destroy it, he published it. This does not invalidate the
copyright claim of Bitcoinica so it cannot be used by a competitor directly
without approval. Furthermore, the hedging algorithm (which is the only thing
that can hypothetically be considered valuable, everything else is glue and
UI) wasn't performing well and was supposed to be changed anyway. I looked at
the the source code, and the hedging algorithm appears to be very simple (I
wrote and ran an arbitrage bot between Mt. Gox and Tradehill in the past so I
know a bit about it). It appears to me that it just sets up a single order in
the "underhedged" sum per job run and then leaves the position open until it
either executes or the available reserves go to zero and then it cancels all
open orders. That's not exactly rocket science.  
  

Quote from: MemoryDealers on August 15, 2012, 10:06:49 AM

3\. Amir is directly responsible for delaying the return of funds to creditors
by refusing to relinquish his control of Bitcoinica.  

I don't know the exact contents of your negotiations, but since he did not
appear to have much control in the first place, it probably would have had
very little practical effect if he agreed.  

  
1\. It is my problem because it was my money that was stolen.  
  
2\. There was a deal in the works for Bitcoinica to be sold for enough money
to cover the entire shortfall for returning customer funds. That deal fell
apart because Amir open sourced the code. Open sourcing it destroyed most of
its value in the eyes of the potential buyers.  
  
3\. Between Amir, Patrick, and Donald, they had total control. All we needed
was for two of the three to cooperate and every creditor would be much better
off today, and likely have %100 of their money back. Instead Patrick lied to
me via email, and again right to my face when I met him in SF. Amir and Donald
refused to even reply to emails.  
  
The best thing they the three of them can do for Bitcoin is to leave forever!

