 I just posted the final conclusion including a donation of 1,000 Bitcoins
worth over $1,000,000 USD at the time.

I've posted the one year update to my $10,000 Bitcoin bet video:

$10,000 Bet that Bitcoins will outperform Gold, Silver by 100X over the next
two years

Please spread this far and wide, It should be good for some positive media
attention.


I’m about to place the official bet on www.longbets.com but I would like some
help tightening up my arguments as to why I think
Bitcoins will outperform Gold, Silver, the US Stock Market and the US Dollar
by one hundred times over the next two years.

So far I am intending to post my argument as follows:

 _Bitcoins are the world's first peer to peer, distributed electronic
currency. This means that they can be sent directly from person to person over
the internet, without needing anyone's help or permission. They are free to
send, receive, or to store, and they can be as public or anonymous as you want
them to be.

With bitcoins, a person in California can send $20,000 USD worth of value to a
person in Russia in a matter of seconds, for FREE.

In comparison:
Paypal would cost about $600, and take a few seconds.
Credit card would cost about $600 and take a few days, to a week, or more.
Bank wire would cost about $40, and take one or two days.

By all of the traditional payment methods, any government can block your
transaction for any arbitrary reason.
Because Bitcoins are peer to peer, no one can block your transaction for any
reason, ever.
A recent example of this property of Bitcoin being put to use, is with the
online gambling industry.
Recently the USA Federal government blocked credit card companies and banks
from being allowed to process gambling related transactions.
Since then, numerous online gambling sites that use Bitcoins have launched.
Because Bitcoins are sent over a distributed, peer to peer network,
governments are powerless to stop them.

With traditional government issued currencies, politicians are always tempted
to just print more whenever they have a budget short fall due to the most
recent war, bailout, or “stimulus” package.
When governments do this, all the citizen’s savings lose value in real terms.
With Bitcoins, governments can never take the value of your money in this way.
Because the software is open source, we know that there will never ever be
more than twenty one million Bitcoins. No one will be able to provide
themselves with additional bitcoins by decree, as happens so often with
traditional government issued currencies.

Bitcoins are also resistant to government tracking or seizure. With just a few
steps, anyone can store their bitcoins in such a way that governments or other
theives are powerless to access them without the correct password.

Bitcoins may also make paying most taxes voluntary since governments will lose
the power to track or control who sends bitcoins to whom.
The IRS, DEA, Customs and Border Patrol, and other agencies will no longer be
able to seize peoples money at will.

Bitcoins may also bring an end to war. Currently governments force all of
their citizens to pay for war efforts whether they are in favor of the war or
not.
Once Bitcoin use is wide spread, the people in favor of the wars will no
longer be able to force the people against the wars to pay for them.
If suddently, the half the population who does not support the wars stop
paying for them, it will quickly become much more expensive for the suppoters
of war to continue funding it.
I suspect that many people who claim to be in favor of the current wars would
change their mind if they had to pay for all of it themselves.

Because Bitcoins are limited to 21,000,000 and they have so many advantages
over traditional government issued currencies,
once even a small percentage of the economy begins using bitcoins, the price
will quickly soar to thousands of dollars per Bitcoin or more.

In short, I believe bitcoins are the most important technological revolution
since the invention of the internet, and because of that, their price will
skyrocket in comparison with
Gold, Silver, the US stock market, and US Dollar.

Please critique the above.
Let me know what you think I have missed, points I should remove or add,
including grammar and punctuation.
Remember, what I post on longbets will likely be read by over a million people
over the next two years.

Thanks for your help!

Please feel free to re-post any of this anywhere you think people would be
interested in it.
