Sorry I'm late to the party.

I have a few facts I would like to correct. Make what you will of it.

1\. I did NOT renounce my citizenship for tax reasons. I haven't lived in the
USA for 9 years, but I've paid about $1M USD each year in US taxes for the
last 10+ years, and will continue to pay a similar amount for as long as I
continue to do business in the USA. (People like Help.org / Milly Bitcoin can
go to hell for claiming I haven't paid my fair share)

2\. My visa is being denied because the embassy workers are claiming that I
haven't sufficiently proved my ties to a country outside the USA that would
motivate me to leave the US at the end of my trip. They told me this verbally
and in writing.
Actual rejection letter:

3\. They told me verbally that my visa denial has nothing to do with my
criminal record from over a decade ago.

4\. While claiming I hadn't sufficiently shown proof of my ties outside the
USA, they were refusing to even look at the proof I had brought. (9 years
worth of ties to Japan) **They wouldn't even let me slide the documentation
through the slot in the interview window!**

5\. Free Talk Live was nice enough to let me tell more of my side of the story
recently:


6\. I shouldn't have stored fireworks in the apartment without the owner's
permission, and I shouldn't have sent them through the mail, but I was 19 or
20 years old at the time of my arrest, and young people tend to do immature
things. I don't think sending me to federal prison was the right response. At
some point I will do a longer write up of all the shenanigans played by law
enforcement with my case.

7\. The internet was a very different place at that time. I was selling the
fireworks on ebay in their guns and ammo section along side all sorts of
ammunition and assault rifles.

8\. I never stored 50lbs worth in an apartment. 50lbs was the total amount
that I purchased over a 1 or 2 year period while I was selling the product.
Only some fraction of that was ever in the apartment at one time. That
included all the packaging materials. Each one contained about 1 gram of
explosive, and I purchased about 2000 pcs total, so the total sold over the
time period was about 2KG and only a fraction of that was ever in the
apartment at one time.

9\. Milly Bitcoin doesn't even bother to read his own links. I was the only
person in the entire world to be sent to jail for selling these without a
permit. The manufacturer sold more than 1,000,000 units and was simply ordered
to stop. Cabelas.com sold the exact same product, and they had no permit. They
were simply ordered to stop. The company I bought mine from, had no permit and
were simply ordered to stop.

10\. I'm not perfect, and have never claimed to be. There is no such thing as
a Bitcoin Jesus. I've made plenty of mistakes with my Bitcoin related work.
I'm just doing the best I can.

11\. I'm not opposed to rules, or police, or government. I'm simply opposed to
all forms of aggressive violence. If you think you have to hurt someone to
solve a problem, you are the problem.

12\. Special thanks to the words of encouragement from the people in this
thread.
