

In tonight's Bitcoin Brainstorming session, we came up with an idea to make
sure Bitcoin will never be banned by governments.  
Rather than having Bitcoin be known as the currency of online drug pushers and
gamblers, we need to have it be known as the currency of charitable donations.  
  
Lets make sure that the  
Red Cross  
United Way  
The Humane Society  
and more  
  
accept bitcoins for donations.  
  
If lots of great charities like these use Bitcoins for fundraising, no
politician would ever dare to ban them!  
  
A great example of a charity that is already accepting bitcoin donations is
http://epicchange.org/donate.php  
  
To get this started, I suggest we contact the the United Way and offer to make
a $10,000 USD Donation via bitcoins  
as soon as they list on their website their Bitcoin donation address.  
  
  
Bruce Wagner of onlyonetv.com has agreed to hold the funds in escrow until we
reach $10,000 worth of BTC.  
MemoryDealers.com will donate $5,000 of the $10,000 so we only need the
community to come up with the other half.  
Once it is listed on the charity's website, Bruce will send out a press
release to all the media contacts he has.  
It should make major news headlines as well!  
  
If you think this is a good idea, please send your Bitcoins to:
1CEmUakCaR71BmELWJPg72QRYzUqEddNm6 (this is stored on MTGOX)  
  
  
  
Please let us know if you have any additional ideas on how to make this plan
even better.  
  
  
\--------------------August 30th update----------------  
Thank you for all the comments and feedback.  
If you don't think the United Way is a worthy charity, please don't donate.  
Instead contact your favorite charity and ask them to directly accept Bitcoin
donations on their website.  
Mention the success that Epic Change has had with bitcoin donations. The more
charities that accept Bitcoin the better, but I suspect that if the biggest
charity in the USA accepts Bitcoin donations, the rest of them will quickly
follow.  
  
If everyone who has read this thread so far had donated $6 worth of Bitcoins,
we would already have the other $5000 to make this a reality.  
Ask yourself, "Is $6 worth the major national news attention Bitcoin would
receive if United Way listed Bitcoin as a donation method on their website?"  
"Do I want the world to think of helping orphans, cute puppies, and those in
need when they hear about Bitcoins?"  
  
If your answer is "YES!" then send your $6 worth of BTC NOW to:
1CEmUakCaR71BmELWJPg72QRYzUqEddNm6  
  
It is easy! Just do it!  

