

I, and I assume many other people, feel that bitcoin will take off once it
finds some killer app that really makes use of the strength of BTC. And anyone
with any amount of BTC benefits greatly from bitcoin taking off since that
will cause the price to skyrocket. So we should all be very interested in this
happening.  
  
The best use of BTC I can think of that also has the benefit of spreading the
idea of BTC rapidly is a tipping service. Here are some key parts of the
service that I and other people have thought of:  
  
o Twitter tipping system.  
Allow people to tweet BTC tips to other twitter users. Has great  
potential to go viral and spread throughout the entire twitter  
population.  
A twitter user would just tweet to us: #tip @bob  
then we would tweet this fact to bob and send him 1 BTC  
If bob already was registered with us then great. Otherwise we would  
give him a link to register and claim his coin.  
Obviously can spread quickly since this stuff will show up in people's  
twitter feeds.  
And I think people will like publicly showing their support for what they are
tipping.  
  
o Web based tipping.  
A browser plugin that allows you to tip the webpage, facebook page or  
blog you are currently reading. The page doesn't have to know about  
the tipping service. If it is some new page we will scrape it or the  
site for an email address that seems appropriate and send the tip to  
it.  
Once tipped the site owner will be encouraged to place a tip button on  
their site thus spreading the knowledge of the service.  
  
o SMS tipping.  
A service that allows you to send small BTC amounts by text message to  
any phone that can receive SMS.  
they would just text to our number: send <amount> <number>  
Basically the same as the twitter thing but with SMS.  
  
o Forum tipping plugin.  
Plugin for popular forum software allowing people to tip posters they like.  
  
The beauty of all these is that they only require the tipper to know  
about the service. Once people are tipped they will naturally want to  
find about it to retrieve their coins. I think it would spread pretty  
quickly. People who own BTC have extra incentive to tip since tipping will
increase the popularity of BTC and thus the value of the BTC that they own.  
  
If you make this you should call it CoinToss  
  

